Is going on the offensive the best defense in a white-collar trial?

That question was on display in the past week when  John Dowd, a lawyer for Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam, came out firing as he grilled a star government witness in the insider-trading case against his client.

At times nearly shouting, Mr. Dowd aggressively questioned  Anil Kumar, a former McKinsey & Co. consultant who has pleaded guilty and is testifying on behalf of the government about the alleged insider-trading scheme. Mr. Dowd accused Mr. Kumar of telling a "monstrous" lie and taking payments from Mr. Rajaratnam because he was "envious."

Criminal complaints and developing disclosures in the Galleon insider trading case allege a far-reaching and complex scheme. Review the known and alleged relationships.

Such a rough-and-tumble approach can be effective. But it also risks backfiring if jurors wind up feeling sympathy for a witness who is taking a beating from the defense, some lawyers and jurors said. 

That is what seemed to happen in the criminal trials of entrepreneur Martha Stewart and the son of socialite Brooke Astor. In contrast, a soft-spoken approach appeared to work in the defense of rapper Sean "Diddy" Combs, according to legal specialists.

"There is some form of sympathy for the person on the stand who is having a hard time with the lawyers," said  Meg Crane, a graphic designer who was a juror in Ms. Stewart's obstruction-of-justice trial. 

Ms. Stewart and her stockbroker were convicted in 2004 despite efforts by the broker's lawyers to discredit a key government witness by repeatedly citing his prior drug use. "It made me feel sorry" for the witness, she said.

Of course, the facts ultimately will most determine the outcome of the Rajaratnam case, which hinges on roughly 90 hours of wiretapped calls the government taped of Mr. Rajaratnam and his associates. But legal specialists said the defense's strategy could be crucial in winning over or alienating jurors.

Mr. Dowd declined to comment.



In a packed New York federal court this week, Mr. Dowd bore in on Mr. Kumar about money that was reinvested in a Galleon offshore fund using his Indian housekeeper's name.

"You lied to Galleon, didn't you, in these documents?" said Mr. Dowd, referring to the offshore investment.

"I obeyed the managing partner of Galleon's instructions, sir," Mr. Kumar said.

"And that lie to Galleon turned out to be a monstrous lie, didn't it, sir?" Mr. Dowd said.

"Sir, I don't know if one can qualify what—I'm not sure what you mean by monstrous. I obeyed the managing partner of Galleon, Mr. Raj Rajaratnam's, instructions."

Mr. Dowd slammed down a notebook after pressing Mr. Kumar for answers about his motivations in his dealings with the hedge-fund manager.

"You wanted something for nothing. Isn't that a fact?" Mr. Dowd said.

Two summers ago,  Frederick P. Hafetz used similar tactics when he questioned Brooke Astor's nurse in the trial of Ms. Astor's son,  Anthony Marshall, for allegedly stealing millions of dollars before her death in 2007.

Mr. Hafetz accused the nurse of lying to the jury and delved into diary entries in which she referred to Mr. Marshall's wife as "Miss Piggy" and Mr. Marshall as "Golden Retriever."

"Did they teach you at nursing school to refer to them in derogatory, pejorative, insulting language, ma'am?" Mr. Hafetz said, according to news reports.

"There's a reason for what I did, what I said," Pearline Noble responded.

Mr. Hafetz said he believed tough questioning was the only way to overcome an "extremely aggressive prosecution."

"It's all about credibility," Mr. Hafetz said. "You've just got to convey to the jury that the witness was not believable. Often, an aggressive approach is dictated by the situation."

One juror in the case said Mr. Hafetz didn't win any sympathy with his tactics. In October 2009, Mr. Marshall was convicted of grand larceny and other charges. He is appealing the conviction.

"It was kind of unfair," said Astor juror  Olga Zugor, a retired textiles designer, of Mr. Hafetz's tactics. As for Mr. Hafetz, she said: "I didn't like him much."

In the 2001 trial of Mr. Combs in an alleged nightclub shooting, criminal-defense lawyer  Benjamin Brafman said one prosecution witness—a young, petite woman—turned out to be one of the most effective for the defense, Mr. Brafman said.

"If I had tried to beat her up, I would have also run the risk of alienating the jury and, in doing so, cost me all of the goodwill I had built up by that point in the trial," he said.

Mr. Brafman said he approached her with a gentle, soft-spoken style. And she helped demonstrate how a truthful person trying to remember could be confused or mistaken about what they saw, particularly that night in the nightclub.

Mr. Combs was acquitted of all charges.

In the Rajaratnam case, Mr. Dowd has attacked Mr. Kumar about his failure to disclose payments he received from Galleon to his McKinsey colleagues or to report the fees on his income taxes, among other things. Mr. Dowd has said the payments were for legitimate reasons.

"And, in fact, you were envious of your friends, your rich friends, were you not?" Mr. Dowd said.

"Sir, I have a lot of very poor friends, and I feel very privileged," Mr. Kumar said.

"And you were envious of your rich friends, correct?" Mr. Dowd said.

"I am not envious of my rich friends," Mr. Kumar said.

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com and Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com 