LANDOVER, Md.—There was no stuttering over the word, no hesitation in his lilt. Giants coach Tom Coughlin stood in his team's practice bubble Friday, spoke of his players and freely said, "I love these guys."

"He said that?" linebacker Michael Boley said. "He said l-o-v-e?" cornerback Corey Webster said.

"Well, of course we know he loves us," kicker Lawrence Tynes said. "Now for him to come out and say that, it's a little bit different than what his normal modus operandi is. But we love him in return."

Emotion and feeling and uncommon words have all materialized in the Giants universe this past week. The most fevered of them surround Mr. Coughlin, who just a few weeks after being bandied about as a Coach of the Year candidate is suddenly embattled, pilloried by the self-professed pundits as cold and out of touch.

So, as the Giants readied for their final regular-season game here against the Redskins, their postseason chances not yet settled, they used words like "absurd," "ludicrous" and just plain "stupid" for all the external criticism. Playing the archetypal "players' coach," they uniformly said, is not the only way to be a players' coach.

"A coach you want to play for is a coach who gets things done. That's Coach Coughlin—he's just old school," Mr. Boley said.

The 64-year old Mr. Coughlin began his career as a college coach, where strict discipline is in the syllabus and 18-year-olds aren't allowed to chafe in the same way 30-something millionaires do. There's obviously a different coach-player relationship in the NFL, and Mr. Coughlin said as much this week.

"It may be more of because you have a bigger influence on them and their development [in college]. It could be more fatherly," he said. Still, here, on this level, he said "it's a bond that develops between people that work together and have common purposes and have the best interest of everybody at heart."

That is how these Giants say they have developed an affinity for Mr. Coughlin. Mr. Webster, who had a similar disciplinarian at LSU in Nick Saban, said if Mr. Coughlin didn't push him, "I'd think he didn't care about me. He makes me think I can be the best.''

Before he came to New York last season, Mr. Boley played for three head coaches in Atlanta—Jim Mora, Bobby Petrino and Mike Smith. Mr. Mora, he said, was "the ultimate players' coach." But he also, Mr. Boley said, had little control.

Mr. Coughlin, in contrast, keeps the tightest control, but, he said, with good reason.

"Some coaches will say, 'They're men, they're either going to get it or not,' " he said. "Coach Coughlin believes we can all get it and he makes sure we do."

Those demanding ways haven't always worked for Mr. Coughlin. Safety Antrel Rolle loudly grumbled to a radio audience about the coach's tight reins after the season's second week. 

But it was no less a player than former Giant and future Hall of Famer Michael Strahan who earlier this season promised that Mr. Coughlin's ways have been proved right over time. And now, as these questions arise about Mr. Coughlin's job security, not one player has publicly—or anonymously—fed that maelstrom.

Mr. Coughlin is famously more personable now, even more so than in 2007, when he led the Giants to their stunning Super Bowl win over the then-undefeated Patriots.

He'll bowl with the players during training camp. Tri-captain Chase Blackburn said he impressed them with how loose he was during their three-day snow stranding in Kansas City three weeks ago, and running back Ahmad Bradshaw said his opening line the Monday after the Giants had blown their fourth-quarter, 31-10 lead to the Eagles—"I'm proud of you"—absolutely had an impact.

Warm and fuzzy doesn't always jibe with the public Mr. Coughlin, and yet the Giants complex is littered with warm and fuzzy Coughlin stories.

Mr. Tynes was new to the organization, traded to the Giants from Kansas City when his wife was in the midst of what he called a "very, very difficult pregnancy."

"The first basket of flowers I got were from Tom Coughlin," he said. "I texted everyone, 'We have two boys,' and right that morning at my house was this big batch of flowers from him."

Left tackle Shawn Andrews met Mr. Coughlin for the first time this August, on the last day of training camp, as the Giants weighed taking a chance on this one-time All-Pro lineman with two back surgeries and a devastating bout of depression on his résumé.

Mr. Andrews said he couldn't get much of a read on the coach, until they started talking about his mental health.

"I noticed he really listened to me,'' Mr. Andrews said. "It was something to the effect of second chances. His response was a little different than I expected."

So, perhaps, is the Giants players' response to their coach. And maybe it's because of that one little four-letter word.

"He's that firm father figure that everyone I think craves," Mr. Tynes said. "He's going to ride you, but he's going to love you too."