Amid a dry spell for breakthrough cancer drugs, recent U.S. approval of Eisai Co.'s Halaven represents some vindication for a small group of researchers who believe, contrary to recent pharmaceutical fashion, that molecules from nature hold promise against hard-to-treat diseases.

The Food and Drug Administration's approval of Halaven in November for treating late-stage breast cancer was a triumph of chemistry and tenacious research. Its path, extending nearly three decades from the first studies, demonstrates not only potential benefits but also some of the hurdles in the hunt within nature's bounty for drugs of the future.

1. Quinine, made from bark of the cinchona tree, has been used for centuries to treat malaria.

2. The chemical salicylic acid, found in willow bark, was the basis for the development of aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid).

3. Cyclosporin, isolated from soil samples, is an immunesuppressant used to prevent transplanted-organ rejection.

4. The diabetes drug Byetta, approved in 2005, derives from a hormone of the Gila monster, a lizard of the southwest U.S.

5. Taxol, a staple of chemotherapy, comes from the Pacific yew tree.



Primitive creatures developed many clever ways to kill each other after billions of years of evolution, and some can be turned to human use. "Weapons of mass destruction are alive and well on a coral reef," says  David Newman of the National Cancer Institute, who has studied the subject for decades.

Halaven derives from halichondrin B, a substance identified in a black sponge that lives off the coast of Japan. Studies showed it has a powerful effect on tumors, blocking cell division in a way that scientists hadn't previously thought of. 

  Yoshito Kishi, a Harvard University chemistry professor, synthesized halichondrin B with funding from the National Cancer Institute. His work galvanized researchers at Eisai of Japan, who identified the active part of the molecule and, working with Dr. Kishi, went on to create the drug. Chemists say Halaven is among the most complex small-molecule drugs ever made commercially. 

Dr. Kishi fears younger researchers are ignoring Halaven's lesson. Eisai Co., led by the founder's grandson since 1988, stuck with the Halaven research despite nearly dropping it more than once. "If the CEO changes every 10 years, then this type of project couldn't go through," Dr. Kishi says.

Big pharmaceutical companies used to have entire sections devoted to research on natural products, and they yielded some major anticancer drugs. Taxol, from the Pacific yew tree, is a staple chemotherapy drug; another set of widely used drugs derives from the Madagascar periwinkle plant. Yet despite popular notions about the miracle cures lying in the Amazon, many companies over the past decade have scaled back research into potential natural sources.

Recently, rather than start with nature, many corporate scientists have been starting with a target, the particular process in cancerous cells that goes awry. They look for drugs, typically synthetic or semi-synthetic molecules cooked up by humans, that can block the target process. 

This type of search holds out hope of a cure, rather than simply extending life. Halaven, meanwhile, is no cure. A study found it extended the life of patients with advanced breast cancer by about two-and-1/2 months, to 13 months. 

At first it was hard to gather enough of the sponge molecule for research, let alone for studies on animals. The National Cancer Institute in the 1990s teamed up with the government of New Zealand to harvest a ton of sponges just to get a few hundred milligrams.

Cancer drugs from nature tend to have nasty side effects. Typically they work by blocking cell division, using a chemical "weapon" that one bacterium or fungus may use against another. When these drugs work, they also harm healthy cells. And in the most difficult tumors, they may lose effectiveness, as cancerous cells develop resistance.

That's why research into targeted drugs is center stage at large companies. "Natural-products discovery is a small-company endeavor nowadays," says  Ken Lloyd of Nereus Pharmaceuticals Inc., of San Diego, which is awaiting data from mid-stage trials of a lung-cancer drug derived from a marine fungus.

The fashion for targeted therapies also may have its blind spots. Some targeted therapies also offer only a few extra months of life. The best-known,  Novartis AG's Gleevec, which went on the market in 2001, works by turning off the protein blamed for triggering chronic myeloid leukemia, a cancer of the blood and bone marrow. Gleevec has produced a nearly 90% five-year survival rate in patients, and 2010 sales were on track to top $4 billion.

But Gleevec is virtually alone among targeted therapies in delivering such dramatic outcomes. Hopes that deciphering the human genome would lead directly to cures have failed to pan out; billions of dollars in corporate research has produced a string of failures. In breast cancer, for example,  Pfizer Inc.
PFE


0.75
%




's Sutent failed two big trials last March, showing serious side effects but no efficacy when added to chemotherapy.

In that light, Halaven's modest benefit looks meaningful. Eisai has said it hopes annual sales eventually top $1 billion. Much depends on whether Halaven proves valuable against earlier-stage disease, and on how well it works in combination therapies that are given the best odds of holding back cancer.  Takashi Owa, head of Eisai's cancer unit, says Eisai wants to test it as a first-line therapy. 

And don't assume natural products are doomed to modest efficacy compared with targeted drugs, Dr. Owa says. "Cytotoxic [cell-killing] agents in some cases can demonstrate unexpectedly remarkable clinical benefit," he says. A natural molecule, if screened properly, may prove to have the same qualities as a targeted drug—or even reveal previously unknown targets.

 One popular drug target is "mammalian target of rapamycin" or mTOR. Rapamycin is a bacteria-derived antifungal drug that turned out to have anticancer properties. Scientists discovered the mTOR target, and now  Merck & Co.
MRK


0.55
%




 and others are testing anticancer drugs believed to hit mTOR better than rapamycin does. 

  Charles Sawyers, a cancer researcher at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, who was involved in the Gleevec research, says, "Natural products remain quite interesting and, often, represent the most exquisite examples of targeted therapies—selected for their activities through evolution." 

 Write to  Peter Landers at peter.landers@wsj.com 