FOXBOROUGH, Mass.—Jets coach Rex Ryan moaned about the way Patriots quarterback Tom Brady points at the Jets sideline after scoring.

Jets defensive lineman Shaun Ellis called it taunting. Cornerback Antonio Cromartie got profane discussing it and Mr. Brady didn't unequivocally deny doing it, turning to some platitude about "the spirit of the game."

Finally, 36-year-old Jets linebacker Jason Taylor tried ending the chatter, saying, "If you don't want somebody to celebrate, don't let them score."

Yeah, good luck with that.

After three Super Bowl rings, one NFL MVP trophy and six Pro Bowl trips, Mr. Brady is in the midst of his most impressive, most dominating, definitely most finger-pointing-worthy season. He's thrown 36 touchdown passes, been picked off just four times and his absurd streak of passes without an interception now sits at an NFL-record 335.

Mr. Brady has done it all as the Patriots have retooled their offense—moving the focus from game-breaking receiver Randy Moss to two game-changing tight ends—and he's doing it this week while the Jets keep thinking he's rattle-able.

As for whether that's actually possible, Mr. Brady slyly smiled as he stood inside his locker Wednesday and said, "We'll see Sunday night at 7:30."

Mr. Brady has long been the Q-rating quarterback, the one with the supermodel wife, the fancy endorsement deals and the Justin Bieber haircut. When Bostonian Matt Damon was named People magazine's Sexiest Man of the Year, he said Mr. Brady was the more worthy winner.

Yet, in the midst of the celebrity, the square-jawed advertisements and the hassling from his teammates for free Ugg boots ("We all wanted them as soon as he signed that deal," running back Sammy Morris said), Mr. Brady really is a transformational quarterback.

"1 and 1A," Mr. Ryan said Wednesday of Mr. Brady and the Colts' Peyton Manning, the signal-caller he likes to tweak Mr. Brady about.

Which is which?

"I don't know," Mr. Ryan said.

"It's like asking, 'Do you prefer blonds or brunettes?'" said ProScout, Inc.'s Mike Giddings, Jr., who has evaluated NFL players for 24 years and is currently contracted by a dozen NFL teams to do so.

Yes, he said, Mr. Manning— whom the Jets defeated Saturday in the AFC's wild-card round— is more widely recognized as the quarterback of this generation. But, Mr. Giddings said, there's no tangible reason for that belief anymore.

"You take every fundamental quarterback trait," he said, "and they're standing right next to each other."

The superlatives are plentiful; Jets defensive end Trevor Pryce said, at this point, there's almost a tiresome quality to them.

"I'm not worried so much about how good he is," Mr. Pryce said. "We all know how damn good he is."

Okay, but why? Why was Mr. Brady able to throw for 326 yards and four touchdowns while connecting on 21 of 29 passes when the Jets last came to Foxborough?

"I do what my coach asks me to do," Mr. Brady said before, as is his style, referring to the entire offense's success.

It's true: Mr. Brady lost his downfield threat when Mr. Moss was traded and the Patriots offense became more balanced than it's been in some time. They're running the ball well, their play-action passing has therefore improved and it all can, Mr. Brady said, "create some indecision with what the defense is trying to do."

Confusion or not, Mr. Brady is among the best at picking apart whatever it is the defense is doing. He makes excellent sight adjustments and picks out mis-matches. Like in that last 45-3 romping over the Jets, when on a second-and-seven at the Jets' 37-yard line, he saw safety Eric Smith on the receiver-quick, 245-pound tight end Aaron Hernandez, threw long to him and goaded Mr. Smith into a 36-yard pass interference penalty, setting up the Patriots' first touchdown.

He picked out when 5-foot-9, 172-pound cornerback Drew Coleman was on 6-foot-6, 265-pound tight end Rob Gronkowski, and, when the Jets were blitzing, when to send Deion Branch into motion for a quick slant that the receiver turned into a touchdown.

Those short passes have become Mr. Brady's bread and butter —all five of the pass plays of at least 20 yards in the teams' last meeting came on short passes—and that's because he puts the ball exactly in the spot where his pass catchers are positioned to get yards after the catch. 

Even more than the accuracy, though, it's the brains, Mr. Branch said.

He affectionately called Mr. Brady a "dork" for the time he spends in the film room ("Did he really?" Mr. Brady asked. "I'm flattered.") and Mr. Pryce offered the same praise, betting the signal-caller understands defenses as much as any defensive player does.

That helps to explain the incredibly tight relationship Mr. Brady and Mr. Belichick have forged since he was drafted in the sixth round in 2000, behind 198 other players.

Once mired behind six other quarterbacks at the University of Michigan, Mr. Brady was one of four as a rookie and the Patriots' third option his second training camp. Then the Patriots' quarterbacks coach Dick Rehbein suffered a fatal heart attack, Mr. Belichick began to coach the quarterbacks and the two men are clearly in lockstep now.

"The coach schemes and game-plans and says, 'Tom, if they're in this, let's go here.''' Mr. Giddings said. "There are numerous coaches who may see it and may try to teach it and the quarterback sees it (on the field) too sometimes," Mr. Giddings said. "Brady and Belichick see it the same 99 percent of the time."



—Scott Cacciola contributed to this report.