Sean Evans and D.J. Kennedy had met before arriving at St. John's, competing against one another at tournaments across Pennsylvania.

Once Evans (Philadelphia) and Kennedy (Pittsburgh) became roommates and moved off-campus together, they discovered other similarities. Both were raised by single mothers, both had people close to them killed and locked away in jail. 

"We grew closer and closer," Evans said.

"We're like brothers," Kennedy agreed.

Now they are bound by another bittersweet connection: As No. 6 St. John's prepares for its first NCAA Tournament game against No. 11 Gonzaga Thursday night in Denver, Evans will help answer the question: Can St. John's survive without Kennedy?

Kennedy, the team's third-leading scorer (10.4 ppg) and top rebounder (5.6 rpg), will be out for the entire tournament with an injured right knee. Evans, averaging 11.9 minutes, 3.6 points per game and 2.6 rebounds, might seem like an unlikely replacement. But dismissing him would be a mistake, cautioned coach Steve Lavin, who should know. 

Evans, a two-year starter, was wary when he learned a new coaching staff would be arriving for his senior year. Early on, he heard rumors that Lavin planned on replacing him in the starting lineup. That's "when it all went wrong," he said.

He approached Lavin and requested his papers to transfer. But Lavin convinced him that "everyone's going to get a fair hack at it," Evans recalled.

Then the season started.

"Sean is the player on this team that had to modify his role most dramatically," Lavin said. "There were extreme growing pains with that transition."

The minutes drained away and Evans, a 6-foot, 8-inch forward, took up residence at the end of the bench, one more neighborhood he thought he had left behind.

Slowly he came to a realization: Staying had been the biggest mistake of his life.

"There would be times I would come home and say, 'Man, D.J., I don't think I can do this no more,'" Evans recalled recently. "Even though it's all about the team, at the end of the day there's a bigger picture if you want to do something with your life after college."

He saw all his chances, all he'd worked toward slipping away.

Kennedy would listen and offer support. "They're going to see they need you," Evans remembered him saying. "Stick with it."

There was a practical dimension to his encouragement: "It couldn't get worse," Kennedy said, shaking his head at the memory.

Evans gritted his teeth and continued. Then practice the week before the Duke game, he did everything wrong. Assistant coach Mike Dunlap has little obvious patience for missteps, players said, and the critiques rained down.

"He'll call you names, he'll make you run, he don't care," Evans said. "I didn't like him."

But then in front of the team, Dunlap made an announcement, Evans remembered.

"If I was walking down a dark alleyway and I needed somebody to walk with me, you know who I'd bring?" Dunlap asked the team. "I'd bring Sean because he has my back."

Evans was stunned. "It was like, 'Man, there's more this to person. I'm going to give him another chance."

The feeling was mutual.

"I think his fall was substantial so just getting him by himself and working with him and being with him on the lonely days, that was it," said Dunlap. "That's why I coach—for guys like him. To see him come from the abyss and rise back up."

That week against Duke, Evans played 11 minutes and scored 10 points on perfect 5 for 5 shooting, earning the game ball after St. John's upset win. From that point on, he has averaged 18.5 minutes a game and 5.8 points.

In two Big East Tournament games, his production spiked to an average of 31 minutes, 12 points and 10.5 rebounds, some of the best numbers of his career. Against Syracuse, the game of Kennedy's injury, Evans played 36 minutes and recorded a double-double.

Before the team left for Denver, Lavin called it "one of the most remarkable transformations within a season," he has ever seen.

Against Syracuse, "I was just trying to step up because I know my team needed it," Evans said.

He knows that Kennedy's absence, though painful, is also an opening. It is the moment he has been waiting for, though it has come at his friend's expense.

"With D.J. down, we're going to need somebody to step up and I know I can do that," he said. "I'm just waiting for that chance and I think I got it now."