BERLIN—German Chancellor Angela Merkel's Christian Democrats, or CDU, suffered losses in elections in the small eastern state of Saxony-Anhalt Sunday, according to consolidated preliminary results, but gained enough votes to continue a coalition in the state with the Social Democrats, or SPD. 

The result shows how Ms. Merkel has been weakened by an upheaval against nuclear energy by voters, who didn't seem to be impressed by her apparent turnaround in nuclear policy following the accidents at the Fukushima Daiichi plant in Japan. Ms. Merkel ordered a three-month moratorium on an earlier decision to extend the life-span of Germany's nuclear plants. 

Seemingly unimpressed by Ms. Merkel's actions, voters sent her party down more than 3% of the vote in Saxony-Anhalt. That was about the same share the opposition Green party gained, which for the first time since the mid-1990s re-entered the state parliament. 

"It's a clear result," Reiner Haseloff, the CDU candidate for state premier, said after the first results came in. He acknowledged that issues from beyond the state influenced the elections, but said he is ready start discussions about a continuation of the coalition with the SPD soon. The SPD is in opposition to the CDU at the federal level. 

Losses for Ms. Merkel's CDU came after the party already lost elections in the state of Hamburg earlier this year, and ahead of elections in two more states next week, among them the key state of Baden-Württemberg, where a CDU state premier may be replaced by one from the Greens if opinion polls turn out to be right. 

Further complicating the situation for the CDU, the liberal Free Democrats, or FDP, the junior coalition partner of Ms. Merkel's federal government, failed to enter the parliament of Saxony-Anhalt. 

The Greens, however, easily jumped over the 5% threshold required to gain any parliamentary representation. The party has traditionally been weak in Eastern Germany. 

"In the face of the tragedy in Japan, people want to know what responsible energy policy looks like," Green party leader Claudia Roth said on ARD television. 

According to a preliminary count broadcast on ARD television, the CDU achieved 32.7% of the vote, a loss of 3.5%, while the SPD got 21.5%. 

The opposition Left party garnered 23.8% of the vote. With that, it could theoretically also form a government with the SPD, but both the Social Democrats and the Christian Democrats before the election said they want to continue their current coalition. 

The Greens almost doubled their share of votes to 7%. 

 Write to  Bernd Radowitz at bernd.radowitz@dowjones.com 