The NFL wants to convince the league's 1,700 players their union forced a potentially costly lockout instead of cutting a deal that met players' financial demands.

League officials have released details of the negotiations and a financial analysis of their final offer. Their aim is to try to show the general public—and specifically fans and players—the union's leaders and its attorneys potentially sacrificed millions of dollars in player pay this season for a chance to sue the NFL when the two parties were, according to league officials, close on the economics of a deal.

"If I was a player and I found out my union had cost me an entire season because of a disagreement over about 2.5% or 3% [of overall revenue], I'd be very angry,"  Eric Grubman, the NFL's executive vice president for finance, said in an interview Wednesday. 

The players and owners are at odds mainly over how large a portion of overall revenue, projected at $9.4 billion for 2011, would be available for player compensation. The league wants to cap salaries at $141 million for each of the 32 teams in 2011, or about $4.51 billion league-wide; the players are seeking a cap of at least $151 million per team, or about $4.83 billion.

Players association spokesman  George Atallah insisted the two sides weren't close. He said the league agreed with the union's analysis that the final offer would cost players some $2 billion during the next four years, compared with terms of the recently expired deal. 



Take a look back at some of the disputes that have upset play in major-league sports. 

With the negotiations on hold and a potentially lengthy legal fight commencing, a central question has become whether the players association leadership can hold its disparate membership together through a long work stoppage, something it has never been able to do. The NFL players union splintered within weeks during strikes in both 1982 and 1987.

"It's the most important job any union's executive director has, particularly here, where there is so much salary disparity between members," said  Robert Lanza, a former lawyer for the National Basketball Players Association. "Can the leaders meet the trust factor?"

NFLPA Executive Director  DeMaurice Smith has spent the past two years criss-crossing the country to meet with players and build unity.

League officials say the owners and players are $320 million apart in their stances on total compensation and benefits for players this season, and they say the gap narrows in coming years. NFL officials said they met the union's demand for a limit on salaries of $161 million per team in 2014. 

Based on the figures, the stalemate and ensuing lockout are the result of a dispute over 3.4% of the NFL's projected 2011 revenue of $9.4 billion. "It's important for the players to know," said NFL spokesman  Paul Hicks. "We want the facts of the deal out there."

The league's efforts come as player representatives gather in Florida for the NFL Players Association's annual meeting and to plot a strategy to maintain unity. With negotiations at a standstill last Friday, the players association opted to decertify as a labor organization and sue the NFL for antitrust violations in U.S. District Court in Minnesota. 

In response, NFL owners locked out the players last Saturday after the collective-bargaining agreement expired. They will gather Monday in New Orleans for their own talks.

A players association analysis of the NFL's offer illustrates the union's rationale for ending talks. According to the players, the league's proposal reduces player compensation by $448 million, compared with the expired agreement, in the first year and some $2.1 billion overall through the 2014 season. 

Meanwhile, lawyers for both sides are gearing up for the legal battle, which continues next week when the NFL files its response to the players antitrust suit. The response is expected to portray the union as plotting a two-year plan to decertify and sue the league as a way to avoid reaching a deal through collective bargaining. 

Players association leaders say decertification and litigation were the only choices they had, other than accepting the league's plan. The association has asked the court to issue an injunction and order the owners to end the lockout. 

A hearing on the matter has been scheduled in front of U.S. District Court Judge  Susan Richard Nelson on April 6.

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 