JAKARTA—Moody's Investors Service raised Indonesia's local- and foreign-currency debt ratings one notch to Ba1, one notch below investment grade, with a stable outlook, citing the country's resilient economy, improving debt and foreign reserve levels, and favorable economic policy. 

Indonesia, Southeast Asia's biggest economy, saw its credit worthiness plunge following the Asian crisis in 1997/98. Although the economy has since rebounded, most analysts think it will take at least another year for the country to achieve the coveted investment-grade status. 

The Royal Bank of Scotland even puts it at a minimum of two years, while HSBC is more optimistic, forecasting Fitch to lift Indonesia's rating to investment grade in the second half of this year. 

"While the recent focus has been on the country's building inflation concerns, and may stay so for a while more, if we take a step back, Indonesia's resilient growth, fiscal health and comfortable debt positions still stand out—especially in the current atmosphere of global concerns about sovereign indebtedness," HSBC economist Wellian Wiranto said. 

The Moody's upgrade Monday put Indonesia's rating on par with the double-B-plus ranking assigned by Fitch Ratings, but one notch above Standard & Poor's double-B rating, with a positive outlook. 

"Momentum in the economy is expected to be sustained by steady domestic demand, a reasonable pace and sequencing of policy and structural reforms, and rising foreign direct investment," said Aninda Mitra, vice-president at Moody's and its lead sovereign analyst for Indonesia. 

"Furthermore, the country's debt position and reserve adequacy remain on an improving trajectory relative to most of its ratings peers," he added. 

Domestic financial markets' reaction were relatively muted following the news. The country's main stock index fell 0.9% at 3535.731 as foreigners continued to cash-in profits. Profit-taking also hit local government bonds, with the 10-year yield rising to 8.54% from 8.49% Friday. Late Monday in Jakarta, the rupiah stood at 9,070 rupiah a dollar, easing slightly from 9,065 rupiah Friday in New York. 

"Indonesia deserves an upgrade as we have been successful in maintaining macroeconomic stability as well as achieving relatively high economic growth amid numerous global and domestic challenges," said Bank Indonesia's Deputy Governor Hartadi Sarwono. 

Moody's cites political risks as one of the headwinds Indonesia faces. 

"Opposition from coalition partners has slowed the government's drive to implement far-reaching economic reforms; however, this has not thus far impacted overall policy management capabilities or near-term economic prospects," Mr. Mitra said.

The Moody's upgrade will likely prompt Standard & Poor's to raise Indonesia's ratings to one notch below investment grade in the second half of this year, Barclays Capital economist Prakriti Sofat said. 