(Please see Corrections & Amplifications item below.)

SHANGHAI—Almost one half of U.S. businesses surveyed in Shanghai complained of discrimination by domestic regulators, contradicting an assertion by Chinese President Hu Jintao that the playing field is level.

The issue of alleged bias against U.S. companies is likely to be a major point of contention during Mr. Hu's visit to the U.S., which began Tuesday. 

The U.S. is expected to push for greater market access to help narrow a huge trade imbalance in China's favor.

An annual survey by the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai, China's main commercial hub, found that 47.7% of 346 respondents said they face regulators who show a preference for domestic companies. The survey, of chamber members, found that 31.3% said treatment is balanced.

Respondents by a 2-to-1 ratio said Beijing's efforts to address a key long-term irritant, intellectual-property theft, is stagnant at best.

But the survey, published Wednesday and conducted in November and December, found that nearly 80% of those surveyed said their China operations were profitable last year. Most executives said China is among their company's top three global priorities.

Still, the survey reflected the frustrations of growing numbers of American businesses with operations in China, even as companies in such industries as cars, mobile phones and high-speed trains are forced to relocate operations to the country or risk losing global scale and competitiveness.

Anecdotally in China, a major complaint by foreign companies is they lose out on big government-procurement contracts in a bidding process rigged in favor of Chinese rivals. 

The survey said about 72% of companies said they experienced rising competition from local companies.

A key objective of Mr. Hu's U.S. trip, will be to assure American corporations about equal treatment. U.S. officials are expected to push for guarantees on the issue. 

In a speech last week, U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said Beijing's desire for greater access to high-technology American goods will be tied to China's addressing U.S. concerns. 

"As China reduces the role of the state in the economy, reforms policies that discriminate against U.S. companies, removes subsidies and preferences for domestic firms and technology and allows its exchange rate to reflect market forces, then we will be able to make more progress on China's objectives," Mr. Geithner said.

Mr. Hu said China doesn't distinguish between foreign and Chinese companies. "All foreign companies registered in China are Chinese enterprises," he said in a written response to questions.

Just a decade ago, China was viewed as a long-term play by American businesses that simply wanted a foothold in the populous nation. 

In 1999, 58% of Shanghai chamber members said their profit margins in China were below world-wide levels. Last year 78% said China results at least matched global levels.

Almost half said China was more profitable than most markets and 73% said it was growing faster. Nearly 36% said more than 10% of their global revenue comes from China. But respondents said last year's earnings in China were generated amid an increasingly tough competitive and regulatory environment. 

Only a fifth of respondents said they consider regulations transparent, while 63.1% said regulatory conditions are either staying the same or getting worse. That compares with 36.9% who said they have seen improvement.

China on Tuesday said foreign direct investment rose 17.4% last year to a record $105.74 billion.

Financial buoyancy doesn't mean that multinational companies have an easier time doing business now than they did a decade ago, says Warren Liu, an author and professor who has held senior management roles in the China operations of KFC, Burger King and MasterCard. "The dynamics have shifted," he said, and now foreign companies are being challenged in China to weigh their corporate goals and values, plus sometimes even national security priorities of their home nations.

Beijing wants a deeper commitment from its foreign investors, including greater access to technology. But while that might earn a foreign company short-term profit, it could come at the cost of losing commercial secrets and cause long-term damage by fostering Chinese competition.

A focus of frustration by American businesses is China's "indigenous innovation" strategy, a set of policies that are explicitly designed to build industrial champions. Only 10% of companies told Amcham they have felt a negative impact from the policy since it was announced in late 2009 but just under half said they are concerned the impact is coming, even though China has softened some of its more blatantly discriminatory provisions.

One area in which chamber members share interests with Chinese companies is foreign-exchange rates. Just over 50% of respondents said their business would be harmed with a 10% increase in the Chinese currency's value.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Warren Liu, an author and professor, has held senior roles in China at a number of American companies but never worked for General Motors. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said GM was among his employers.

 Write to  James T. Areddy at james.areddy@wsj.com 