SEOUL—Hana Financial Group Inc. said Tuesday that it has entered a strategic alliance with  China Merchants Bank Co. as the South Korean lender seeks to expand its footprint in Asia. 

"Under the agreement, both companies have agreed to cooperate across all businesses, including retail, private banking, corporate financing as well as the credit-card and foreign-exchange sectors," Hana Financial said in a statement. 

The agreement includes the lenders investing in each other, according to the statement, but Hana Financial said no specifics have been agreed upon and that China Merchants won't be part of its fund-raising efforts to complete the 4.69 trillion won ($4.2 billion) acquisition of a majority stake in Korea Exchange Bank. 

The China Merchants-Hana Financial tie-up follows similar efforts between  Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd. and South Korea's  KB Financial Group Inc.
KB


-3.42
%




 to strengthen business ties. Korea Investment & Securities analyst  Yoo Sang-ho said such discussions reflect South Korean lenders' desire to expand overseas as well as Chinese banks' interest in the South Korean market. 

"Chinese banks have a lot of interest in the Korean banking industry," Mr. Yoo said. "It's not a big market, but it is geographically close. There are synergies to be gained by collaboration [with Korean banks]." 

China Merchants Bank couldn't immediately be reached for comment. 

South Korea's largest lenders— Woori Finance Holdings Co., KB,  Shinhan Financial Group Co. and Hana—are increasingly looking abroad to find new sources of growth as the domestic market has grown more competitive. Traditionally corporate-banking-focused Korea Development Bank and Industrial Bank of Korea are looking to boost their retail-banking operations. 

Hana's response to the stiff competition has been to try to gain a foothold in the Chinese market as part of plans to become a major Asian lender. The firm last year acquired an 18% stake in China's Bank of Jilin for 371.97 billion won. 

However, analysts say South Korean banks' overseas expansion efforts have yet to bring tangible results. They also say the domestic lenders may have a difficult time scaling up quickly, given that many other players have already entered major Asian growth markets, raising valuations for potential assets and making acquisitions more expensive. 

"At the same time, you haven't seen any foreign banks go into China and make significant headway," Korea Investment's Mr. Yoo said. "Hana, in a way, is going after niche markets by strengthening relationships in specific provinces...like Jilin, where there are many Korean people as well as Korean businesses." 

Separately, Hana Financial aims to finalize a 1.2 trillion won share sale in late January or early February that will help fund the acquisition of a 51% stake in KEB, a company official told Dow Jones Newswires Tuesday. 

The official didn't identify the bidders, but people familiar with the situation have said that private-equity firms Affinity Equity Partners, Carlyle Group, Corsair Capital and MBK Partners have submitted letters of intent. 

The official said China Merchants Bank won't be able to get the necessary regulatory approval in time to take part in the KEB financing. Hana has been pursuing a strategic tie-up with the Chinese bank separately from the KEB acquisition, he said. 

Analysts said China Merchants Bank may be able to help Hana Financial in the long run by investing in the Korean lender. 

—Jung-Ah Lee contributed to this article. 



 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 