A spate of multibillion-dollar deals has sent U.S. mergers-and-acquisitions activity soaring 41% this year, surprising many bankers who had expected no more than a 15% to 20% jump in the first quarter.

But even as mergers have made a return, riding the wave of an ebullient stock market, some observers question whether the deal pace is sustainable. That largely depends on the stock market, which is the primary driver of new activity. And market performance eventually is linked to the economy, where U.S. gross-domestic-product growth has been modest and unemployment high.

Bankers still have high expectations. They have a point: This year, there have been $1 trillion of deals globally, up 24% from the same period in 2010, and $419.3 billion of U.S. deals, up 41% from last year, according to data provider Dealogic. Larger deals also are winning favor. There have been 30 transactions of more than $5 billion this year, compared with 22 such deals in the year-ago period.

What's more, the stocks of many acquirers have risen after a deal announcement, historically the opposite for shareholders worried about companies overpaying or losing their focus. For instance, shares of  AT&T Inc.
T


-0.88
%




 are up nearly 13% since March 20, the day it announced plans to buy T-Mobile USA for $39 billion, the year's largest deal, compared with a 3.7% increase in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.

Shares of Nasdaq OMX Group Inc. have risen as high as 14% since the exchange operator disclosed plans to pursue its chief rival, the New York Stock Exchange, whose parent company,  NYSE Euronext, has a merger agreement with Deutsche Börse AG.

The shareholders' seal of approval should beget more deals, said  Steven Baronoff, chairman of global mergers and acquisitions at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

"That bolsters CEO confidence, which drives people to take action, including pursuing different options such as going hostile," he said.

Total returns on the S&P 500 index are up nearly 8% since January, and up 17% from a year ago, driven mainly by strong corporate earnings, according to S&P research. At the same time, companies are increasing internal investment. Private capital spending, measured by gross private domestic investment in equipment and software, has recovered to levels before the financial crisis.

In the first quarter, capital spending was just above $1.1 trillion, similar to the levels seen in the first quarter of 2008, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis. But consumer spending rose at a sluggish 2.7% pace in the first quarter, after having increased 4% in the fourth quarter of 2010.

If anything, the volume of deals signals that chief executives don't think the economic weakness and geopolitical strife are deterrents, said  Boon Sim, head of global mergers and acquisitions at Credit Suisse Group. "The recent surge of M&A activity is a sure sign that the nascent economic recovery is well on its way," he said.

With most investment-grade companies able to issue five-year debt at nominal interest rates in the 2.5%-to-4.5% range, as well as close to $1 trillion of cash sitting on balance sheets, the ability to do deals quickly is even easier.

The upshot is that after a three-year hiatus, companies finally feel confident enough to take acquisition risk, all of which should be a promising sign for the economy.

"There is a real need in the marketplace for growth," said  Jim Woolery, co-head of North American mergers and acquisitions at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. "Most companies have cut as much as they can, and there is a concern that the window [of opportunity] may be perishable" between what sellers are seeking and buyers are willing to pay.

But while deal-making activity is itself an effect of economic stability, it is hard to determine if deals actually cause it. Merging companies pare jobs and spending. In AT&T's pending deal for T-Mobile USA, the companies estimate cost savings of $40 billion over time, including expected layoffs, starting from the third year after the merger is completed.

Some mergers do result in job losses but the labor market is big enough to absorb the changes, said  Robert Bruner, dean of the Darden School of Business at the University of Virginia.

"M&A is a vital tool for companies to become more competitive and productive. In the long run, the economy is likely to be better off to the extent that M&A produces that outcome," he said.

—Katy Burne contributed to this article.

 Write to  Anupreeta Das at anupreeta.das@wsj.com and Gina Chon at gina.chon@wsj.com 