Screwball comedy is generally regarded as the offspring of two incongruous parents—the rise of sound cinema and the adoption of the Hayes Code, the industry's censorship guidelines; yet the first film with synchronized dialogue dates from 1927, seven years before the code. What happened before this shotgun wedding? To answer the question of what sound comedies contained before innuendo slowed down and dialogue sped up, the Spectacle Theater in Williamsburg is presenting "Pre-Screwball Comedy," a three-week series that begins Saturday. And the movies shown aren't the only relic of an earlier time. Admission is only $5.

There's a stellar line of talent behind the camera in "Design for Living" (1933)—directed by Ernst Lubitsch, scripted by Ben Hecht and based on a Noël Coward play—and a none-too-happy platonic ménage à trois (played by Fredric March, Gary Cooper and Miriam Hopkins) in front of it, complete with frank sexual jockeying and dialogue that's tart even to modern ears. In "Female" (1933), a business executive (Ruth Chatterton) is given to bedding her male employees, until she meets an unusually resistant underling (George Brent).

But the series isn't simply libidinous. The Marx Brothers stow away in "Monkey Business" (1931), and a soda fountain is sabotaged with boozy "lemon syrup" in "Caught Plastered" (1931).

The series of 15 films covers an impressive range. "Fast and Loose" (1930) is based on a Preston Sturges script, "The Man in Possession" (1931) was adapted by P.G. Wodehouse for the screen, and there are early star-turns by Clark Gable, Carole Lombard and Bette Davis. More than half the movies in the series—such as "Blonde Crazy" (1931), "No More Orchids" (1932) and "The Dark Horse" (1932)—aren't available on DVD.

Spectacle, a nonprofit venue established last fall in a former bodega in South Williamsburg, not only filled a cinematic gap in this arty neighborhood but joined far-more established Manhattan peers in the diversity and, particularly, the rarity of many of its offerings. When Troy Swain, a self-described "movie fan," learned that the owners of the space "were looking for something community-based," he and partners Forrest Gillespie and Akiva Saunders seized the opportunity to bring rare cinema to a broader audience. In the age of Netflix and streaming video, they chose the sage tactic of luring audiences to the movie house with offerings viewers can't get in their living rooms. 

"The Last Movie" (1971), Dennis Hopper's infamous, hard-to-find financial failure, was screened at Spectacle in the fall, as were movies based on "Alice in Wonderland" by both Louis Malle and Claude Chabrol. Late October featured a rare Italian horror film, "What Have They Done With Your Daughters" (1974), directed by Sergio Leone's early cinematographer, Massimo Dallamano. Jerzy Skolimowski's rare Cat Stevens-scored "The Deep End" (1970) played in February. Rainer Werner Fassbinder's only science-fiction work, the made-for-German-television "World on a Wire" (which had a short run at MoMA last summer), turned up for a week in December. Jacques Rivette's "Out 1" (1971), at 773 minutes, is a test of endurance for even the most devoted cinephile; it is screening for three weeks in May. None of these films are available on DVD.

"Pre-Screwball Comedy" is a sequel of sorts to Spectacle's "Lost Pre-Code Hollywood," which surveyed the dramatic offerings of the years before 1934. "The Thaw" presented Russian films that followed the relaxation in censorship after Stalin's death and featured early works by such seminal Soviet filmmakers as Elem Klimov, Larisa Shepitko, Sergei Parajanov and Andrei Tarkovsky. The films in a January series, "Hollywood vs. Hitler: Early Anti-Fascist Film," were made in 1940 or before.

And that's far from all. Spectacle presents monthly theatrical performances and silent films with live musical accompaniment. A recent week contained everything from silent Soviet science fiction to "Mickey One" (1965), a surreal Arthur Penn gangster film starring Warren Beatty, and Peter Greenaway's first feature-length film, "The Falls" (1983). And Spectacle's "Midnight" movies are easily the wildest in New York, ranging from "The Sinful Dwarf" (1973) to Brazilian psychedelic horror.

As Mr. Swain commented, with new partners "filling in gaps of knowledge we don't have," Spectacle continues to expand its programming sweep. Future plans involve contacting consulates in search of films that never had U.S. releases, and finding translators to subtitle them. When it comes to its pledge to show rarities, Spectacle isn't kidding.

—Mr. Paletta is an editor at the Manhattan Institute's Center for the American University.