Algeria's President Abdelaziz Bouteflika is considering high-level cabinet changes in hope of showing a reformist bent after the country was shaken by riots, people familiar with the matter said. 

There is no clear timing for the changes, but one scenario under consideration would include the promotion of Energy Minister Youcef Yousfi to be the new prime minister, replacing current Prime Minister Ahmed Ouyahia, they said. Such a move could be part of a broader reshuffle aimed at replacing officials with ties to political parties with technical experts whose reputations remain intact after the protests. 

Mr. Yousfi, who became energy minister last year after a corruption probe shook Algeria's oil industry, has had a long career in the hydrocarbons sector as well as in diplomacy. 

Mr. Ouyahia is the secretary general of the National Rally for Democracy, a member of the ruling coalition. 

A presidential spokeswoman said she had no information about any potential cabinet reshuffle. Spokesmen for the energy minister and the prime minister's office couldn't be reached. 

Riots over food prices broke this month, a similar unrest that led to regime change in neighboring Tunisia, and to protests in Egypt and Yemen. The occasionally violent demonstrations have highlighted concerns about the political and economic stagnation in the oil-rich North African nation. Riots have died down since the government took measures to keep food prices under control, but there have been sporadic peaceful protests organized by political parties seeking change. 

"What we need is a technocrat cabinet before the political arena can open," one person familiar with the considerations said. 

The people familiar with the discussions also said the country's high security council--the highest advisory committee on security matters--held a rare meeting following the riots this month. 

One person said the committee discussed the possibility of the government ending a state of emergency, which has been in force since the civil war in the 1990s. Such a move would mark a key concession to civil society in the country. 