Important as the death of Osama bin Laden may be, disposing of al Qaeda's murderous leader wasn't the most important goal for U.S. foreign policy. Actually, it hasn't been for some time.

Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death. 

On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

Instead, the al Qaeda question that burned so deeply into America's soul a decade ago has been overtaken by three more pressing problems: getting Pakistan right, getting the Arab spring right and containing Iran. 

Killing Osama bin Laden begins to close the book on a horrible chapter in American history that began 10 years ago, but these three questions are the ones that figure to dominate the next 10 years. 

The key question, in fact, is whether the U.S. can use his death as a way to get a better arm around these more contemporary problems.

Which isn't to minimize the importance of obtaining the measure of justice that bin Laden's death brings, as President Barack Obama reminded the nation late Sunday night. 

To Americans, he was the personification of evil, and his ability to evade Washington's grasp was a quiet source of frustration and embarrassment. To America's enemies around the world, his survival was a source of inspiration. But as a practical matter, his death says more about how much the al Qaeda problem has morphed into an even bigger Pakistan problem. 

Bin Laden, though the most wanted man in the world, had been living in the heart of Pakistan, in security as well as comfort. 

Whether Pakistan's leaders were ignorant of his whereabouts or chose to be ignorant or were complicit in keeping him safe is the key question. All the potential answers are bad for U.S. interests.

Al Qaeda remains a deadly force, but its foot soldiers likely number in the hundreds, and its most lethal outposts now are distant from bin Laden and his lair.

Pakistan, by contrast is a nation of 187 million people—35% of them under 15 years of age—that borders on China, India, Iran and Afghanistan. It is 95% Muslim, with virulently anti-Western Islamic elements that the government can't entirely control. And it has nuclear weapons and a history of exporting the technology to make them.

Relations between the U.S. and Pakistan are going downhill, and the danger is high that the bin Laden episode will add to popular American anger toward Pakistan. But American officials can't afford to let antagonism overtake the relationship. 

The difference between an al Qaeda hostile to American interests and a Pakistani nation hostile to them is like the difference between fighting off a case of pneumonia and fighting off a whole epidemic. Neither is good, but one is a much graver problem. 

The second imperative for American policy is to get the Arab spring right—and on this front, the decline of al Qaeda and the death of bin Laden should be helpful. 

For weeks since the popular uprisings in the Arab world began in Tunisia and Egypt, U.S. officials and moderate Arab leaders have been hoping that, however messy they might be, Arab pro-democracy movements were undercutting the al Qaeda message that the only way to bring about change was through terror. For young Muslims, perhaps, Facebook and Twitter were trumping jihad.

Indeed, recent polling by the Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project shows that confidence in bin Laden was slumping in the Islamic world, ranging from 22% in Egypt to 1% among Lebanese Muslims. If he once was seen as the wave of the future, he seemed less so at his death. 

So the imperative for the U.S. now is to figure out a way to help foster the pro-democracy wave in the Arab world without allowing it to produce the chaos that opens the door for Islamic extremists to offer their version of a new order.

Finally, there is the need to contain Iran. The largely Sunni al Qaeda movement and the Shiite revolutionaries in Iran aren't natural allies, and it isn't likely that bin Laden will be greatly mourned in Tehran. 

In fact, Iran's mullahs are watching more closely what happens to the popular uprisings in Syria and Libya. 

And the danger is that Iran's leaders are concluding that the lesson to be learned from Syria and Libya is that the way to deal with dissidents is to crush them ruthlessly, and that the way to prevent the Western military intervention now plaguing Libya is to finish developing a nuclear weapon to deter it. 

The challenge for the U.S., in turn, is to use bin Laden's death to make the opposite point to the Iranian people—that time isn't on the side of extremism or extremists, and that America hasn't lost its ability to push events in the opposite direction.

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 

