Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan has invited Kaoru Yosano, who was the last minister of economic and fiscal policy under the Koizumi administration, to join his new cabinet and lead the effort for budget consolidation. The stakes could hardly be higher, because Japan has been pursuing an unsustainable set of tax and spending policies. 

Economists usually assess a country's future stability by asking whether debt will stabilize at a certain percentage of GDP if current policies continue. For Japan the answer is a clear no. In only the last four years, Tokyo has issued new debt totaling 40% of GDP. For the past two years, tax revenues have failed to cover half of total spending. The budget proposal for the next fiscal year, which is expected to be submitted to the Diet later this month, forecasts only 41 trillion yen ($494 billion) of tax revenues against the total budget size of 92 trillion yen. This cannot continue. 

Mr. Yosano wants to raise Japan's consumption tax substantially, but even then Japan's fiscal sustainability will be in jeopardy unless it can generate more growth. In a report commissioned by the National Institute for Research Advancement and just released, we examine Japanese policies over the last 20 years to study what caused the country's growth stagnation. Many of the woes are familiar: the aging of the workforce; the natural limits to export-led growth; the tolerance of a dysfunctional banking system that begat a cohort of zombie firms; and bad fiscal and monetary policy. 

We also pay close attention to regulatory policy and in particular the most visible reforms undertaken by Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi from 2001-06. Growth was collapsing when Mr. Koizumi took office, and in response the government broke with existing norms and tried many experimental policies. As a result, the economy soon recovered and Japan began its longest post war expansion during his administration. The plan to eliminate the primary deficit (the deficit without interest payments) by fiscal 2011, which was announced toward the end of the administration, seemed feasible. 

We look at six major reforms: financial system reform; postal privatization; labor market reforms regarding the use of dispatched workers; agricultural reform and the promotion of free trade areas; deregulation through the creation of special administrative zones; and the reform of local public finance. Not all were successful. Many reform attempts were not specifically targeted to raise growth. Others, such as privatization, specified deadlines too far in the future and so were susceptible to reversal. Measuring progress was often difficult since there were often no numeric targets for the reforms. Only the financial system reform was fully implemented and successful.

This experience should guide the Kan administration as it addresses the pressing need for deregulation. Above all, it is critical to target sectors (or distortions) that affect growth. This strategy improves the chances that the gains will be meaningful, and also makes it easier to explain the importance of the reform to the public and set clear targets that can be achieved in years, not decades.

So let's look at the current government's "new growth strategy." It's essentially a laundry list, much of which does not pass our test for maximizing growth prospects. In particular, the strategy uses old fashioned industrial policy, relies primarily on external demand in many areas, and promotes special zone policies that simply divert spending from one place to another. Worse, the expenditure to implement the strategy is a small portion of the budget that is bloated instead with new subsidies to families with children, farmers, and other narrow groups with which the Democratic Party of Japan seeks to curry favor.

A much better approach would be to junk most of these ideas and focus only on reforms that directly improve growth. Unless a policy can be shown either to raise productivity, to encourage more efficient investment, or increase the supply of labor, it should be ignored. A few of the projects in the new growth strategy might meet this test if implemented correctly. 

For example, accepting high-skilled foreign workers will increase the (quality adjusted) labor force. Promoting more research collaboration between universities, companies and government may help technological progress. Enhancing free trade areas will help pressure the Japanese industries to raise productivity. Eliminating the regulatory separation of kindergartens and nursery schools will improve child care services, which will encourage more talented people to continue working and help increase the population growth at the same time. 

These kinds of growth-enhancing reforms have been effective both in Japan and elsewhere. The main question is whether the political will exists to abandon policies that appease voters in the short run and focus on reforms that restore growth in the long run. 

 Mr. Hoshi is a professor at the School of International Relations and Pacific Studies at the University of California San Diego and Mr. Kashyap is a professor at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. This report can be found at http://www.nira.or.jp/english/index.html. 