The San Francisco Giants' victory in the World Series last fall has boosted ticket sales and corporate sponsorships. But sports-marketing experts say the team must maintain its winning ways to prosper long term.

The team's unexpected run to the playoffs and subsequent World Series win in November are pumping up ticket sales and corporate sponsorships. 

As of last week, season-ticket sales were up about 30% from the end of last season and around 45% ahead of the same time last year. Season-ticket prices range from $850 to $7,636, depending on seat location, the team said. 

The Giants already have sold more than 6,000 season tickets above the total for all of last year, and expect to come very close to the club's limit of 28,000 before the season starts March 31. Seating capacity at AT&T Park is 41,503.

Overall ticket sales are up 50%, with roughly 800,000 more sales than at about the same point in 2010. That is despite the average ticket price rising to $38 from $35.25.

The Giants are emphasizing to fans that a key benefit of a season ticket is it ensures postseason seats. But sales could hit a hurdle. Rich Dyer, who runs the Giants Cove fan blog (www.thegiantscove.com), said most prime-location season tickets have long been snapped up—the Giants sold them as seat licenses when the stadium opened in 2000.

Giants total ticket sales for the past five years

*All-Star Game & Barry Bonds HR Record Pursuit

Source: San Francisco Giants

"The available seating is not all that attractive," said Mr. Dyer. 

Matt Heinz, president of sports-marketing company Heinz Marketing in Seattle, said that while winning is good for business, it is the bond that teams can create with fans that may keep them coming back even when the inevitable losing period arrives.

An example of how not to do things is the Florida Marlins who, after capturing the 1997 World Series, almost completely disbanded the team in favor of new players, Mr. Heinz said.

"The fans had no connection to the team the next year," he said. Ticket sales plummeted to 21,363 in 1998 from 29,190 in 1997.

The Giants' president, Larry Baer, said he understood that concern. "There is a pressure to keep the team together and get the most from the window we have," he said. 

The Giants so far are benefitting on two fronts, ticket sales and corporate sponsorships. Sponsorship renewal rates are at an all-time high, said Jason Pearl, managing vice president for corporate sponsorship and new business development. Mr. Pearl wouldn't give financial details, but said the Giants were "well ahead" of last year's pace in both revenue and number of clients. 

New deals include a tie-up with Sports Authority as the Giants' official sporting goods retailer. And Toyota Motor Corp., an existing sponsor, greatly expanded its on-field advertising, Mr. Pearl said. 

"It's not like people are picking up the phone to call us; the reality of sponsorship is that we still have to make the pitches," said Mr. Pearl. "But we've found people more receptive than they've been in the past."

The Giants also are seeing more revenue from television broadcasts. The Giants own one-third of their broadcaster, Comcast SportsNet Bay Area, while the rest is owned by Comcast Corp.'s NBCUniversal. Estimates from media-tracker SNL Kagan suggest the channel's net revenue will rise to about $147 million this year from $137 million in 2010.

Financial success will come in handy this season to fund a payroll that jumped to $120 million from about $98 million last year. Since winning the World Series, the team signed veteran shortstop Miguel Tejada for $6.5 million, handed first baseman Aubrey Huff a two-year, $22 million contract and gave outfielder Cody Ross a $6.3 million contract. Like most sports franchises, the Giants don't disclose revenue or profitability.

Ultimately, the key to the Giants' popularity likely will depend on whether the team can maintain the hot form it showed at the end of last season. 

Just ask the Philadelphia Phillies. After the Phillies won the 2008 World Series, season-ticket sales the next season rose 4,000 to 28,500, and total sales climbed to 3.6 million from 3.4 million, both capacity levels. 

The club, which also made the 2009 World Series, maintained those levels last year and has seen 123 consecutive sold-out games. 

"Winning is the best sales tool we have," said John Weber, the Phillies' vice president of sales and ticket operations.

 Write to  Sam Mamudi at smamudi@marketwatch.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Baseball's Oakland A's have won the World Series four times. This article in some editions Thursday incorrectly implied that the San Francisco Giants' World Series victory last year was the first for the Bay Area.