TOKYO—Raising concerns over possible contamination from the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, Japan's health ministry said Saturday that an abnormal amount of a radioactive material was detected in spinach grown about 110 kilometers (about 70 miles) northeast of Tokyo. 

The ministry also said that an abnormal amount of the material, called iodine-131, was detected in milk from a dairy farm about 50 kilometers away from the plant. 





See all the graphics on the situation in Japan -- from before and after photos to the status of the reactors to survivors' stories.

"This is the first time ever that an abnormal amount of radioactive material has been detected in food in Japan," said ministry official Ryusuke Hagiwara. 

Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano said that the amounts detected in the milk and spinach would not immediately affect human health. Even so, concerns over possible food contamination mark a serious setback in Japan's attempts to contain its worst-ever nuclear accident as it threatens to widen the economic impact of the disaster to Japan's declining farming industry. 

Also Saturday, Japan's science ministry said that small amounts of a radioactive substance not usually present have been detected in tap water in Tokyo and five nearby prefectures, but it said the amounts are too small to pose a threat to human health. The ministry started monitoring tap water for radioactive material Saturday, and will continue to check it every day. 

In raw milk samples collected from a farm in the town of Kawamata in Fukushima prefecture, up to 1,510 becquerel per kilogram of iodine-131 were detected, about five times the limit of 300 becquerel per kilogram set by law. 

"This will be a huge blow to dairy farms all over Fukushima," said Yukimitsu Sato, a spokesman for the prefecture's dairy farm cooperative, which represents about 60% of local dairy farms, including the one in Kawamata. 

The prefecture had not shipped milk for consumption since the earthquake, and the health ministry's announcement came just as the cooperative was preparing to begin shipping again. 

"We were just starting to see a ray of hope," said Mr. Sato, adding that the cooperative was not told about the radioactivity tests. 

According to the cooperative, Fukushima prefecture's 516 dairy farms usually ship 254 tons of milk every day, with annual sales of about ¥10 billion (about $125 million). About 1.3% of dairy cows in Japan were in Fukushima as of 2008, according to the prefecture. 

The health ministry also detected higher-than-normal levels of iodine-131 from spinach samples collected Saturday from farms in six locations in Ibaraki prefecture, south of Fukushima. 

One spinach sample collected from the city of Hitachinaka, located about 120 kilometers south of the plant, contained 8,420 becquerel per kilogram of iodine-131, according to the health ministry. The normal amount set by Japanese law is 2,000 becquerel per kilogram. 

Another spinach sample from Takahagi, a city closer to Fukushima, recorded 15,020 becquerel per kilogram, more than seven times the normal amount. From that sample, radioactive caesium 134 and caesium 137 were also detected in slightly larger amounts than the limits set by law. 

The Ibaraki prefectural government has asked farmers to suspend shipments of spinach, according to the Ibaraki branch of the National Federation of Agricultural Cooperative Associations. 

An official in Ibaraki prefecture said that he couldn't deny the possibility that some spinach from the prefecture has already reached consumers. The prefecture produces about 14,000 tons of spinach a year, about 5% of overall production in Japan. 

  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 said at a news conference Saturday that it was prepared to offer compensation to farmers. 

Any impact on Japan's agricultural sector will mostly be concentrated on the domestic market. Japan imports far more food than it exports, and even some of the most basic ingredients in Japanese cuisine, such as soy beans, are mostly imported. In 2009, the total value of the country's food imports stood at $53.5 billion, while its exports came to only $3.27 billion, according to the Japan External Trade Organization. 

If fears over contamination grow, the country may have to rely on imports even more. 

Mr. Edano said that the level of radioactive materials detected in the milk means that if a person drank that milk every day for a year, based on average Japanese milk consumption, total exposure to radioactivity would be about the same as one CT scan. If a person ate the spinach in question for one year, the radioactivity would be about one-fifth of one CT scan, he said. 

Mr. Edano said that the health ministry will collect more data to find out whether contaminated foods are limited to certain areas, and whether it is necessary to restrict the consumption or shipment of certain food products. The ministry will also investigate other products besides milk and spinach, he added. 

 --Hiroyuki Kachi contributed to this article. 

