Chinese companies have dominated the global IPO market since 2009, but this year could be a turning point for other emerging markets.

While China is likely to continue generating a significant portion of initial public offerings of stock in 2011—it generated more than Europe and the U.S. combined in the past two years—other emerging-market economies are expected to step up the pace of new stock issuance this year. 

Some might argue that China, owing to its size, shouldn't be considered "emerging" anymore. Yet Wall Street still lumps it together with three other economies that went from slow growth to warp speed in the past decade, conveniently wrapped up in the BRIC acronym—Brazil, Russia, India and, of course, China.

"It's not just the BRIC countries that will be a source of growth in emerging-markets" stock issuance, said  Paul Donahue, co-head of equity capital markets in the Americas at Morgan Stanley. "In 2011 we're likely to see more markets become more active, whether it's Vietnam, or other parts of Southeast Asia, or Africa, which is also showing promise."

Although Vietnam was quiet in 2010, South Korea launched 69 IPOs valued at $6.9 billion, up from 60 that raised $2.5 billion in 2009, according to data provider Dealogic. The biggest boost to its volume came from the $4.4 billion Samsung Life Insurance Co. deal in April.

Similarly, in Latin America, the focus in recent years has been on Brazil as the main engine for new stocks; in 2010, it accounted for half of all deals in the region and 75% of the dollar volume raised, Dealogic said. Brazil is expected to keep its top billing, but there will be more variety south of the U.S. border, said  Frank Maturo, co-head of Americas equity capital markets at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

"In 2011, while Brazil will continue to be strong, we'll see an increase in issuance generated by other countries such as Mexico and Argentina," said Mr. Maturo.

Mr. Maturo and others said emerging-markets IPOs often start out concentrating in industries that are export-oriented, such as energy or outsourced business services. 

But, as China and India have demonstrated, increasing prosperity within a country broadens deal types to include those that serve a thriving local economy, such as consumer products, retail and media. In 2010, India produced 70 IPOs that raised $10.7 billion, up from just 20 that raised $4 billion in 2009.

While the majority of emerging-market IPOs stick close to home when it comes to listings—the bulk of China's deals go public within its own exchanges or in Hong Kong—some do venture farther afield. In 2010, China hit a high of 38 new stocks launched in the U.S., about 34% of the total IPOs tallied in the U.S. That could extend into 2011 beyond China, with more stocks from other areas outside U.S. borders.

"Emerging markets could potentially expand a bit more as a new source of IPOs in the U.S.," said  Jeff Bunzel, head of equity capital markets for the Americas at Credit Suisse, "although China will remain the dominant theme."

Elsewhere in the IPO market: 

• U.S. investment bankers see an 11% increase in the number of U.S. IPOs in 2011, according to a survey by accounting and consulting firm BDO USA LLP.

 Write to  Lynn Cowan at lynn.cowan@dowjones.com 