SINGAPORE—Singapore's economy expanded 12.5% year-to-year in the final quarter of 2010, rounding off a year of record growth, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said Friday, but he cautioned the year ahead would be more challenging due to weak growth in the U.S. and the sovereign debt crisis in Europe. 

The city-state's economy, a bellwether for Asia, grew 14.7% this year, a "dramatic rebound" from last year, Mr. Lee said. In 2009, the economy shrank 1.3%. 

"We should rejoice in this exceptional performance, but please remember that it is also the result of special circumstances, and so is unlikely to be repeated soon," Mr. Lee said in his New Year's address. 

The expansion in the fourth quarter was smaller than growth of 13.4% tipped in a Dow Jones poll of economists. For the full year, the poll had pointed to growth of 15%. The government will release detailed fourth-quarter gross domestic product data Monday.

Mr. Lee reiterated a government forecast that the island nation's GDP growth will slow to between 4% and 6% in 2011, citing a "mixed" outlook for the world economy. 

Mr. Lee said the U.S. economy remains weak and Europe faces a debt crisis in Greece, Ireland and other nations. "The European Union also needs structural reforms to make the single euro currency work, with no straightforward solutions," he said. 

On the bright side, however, China's and India's economies are forging ahead, and GDP in countries in Southeast Asia is growing steadily, Mr. Lee said, adding, "hopefully Asia will continue to do well despite the weakness in developed countries, and create a favorable regional environment for Singapore." 

Singapore's economy this year roared back to life from a downturn in 2009 when the global financial crisis sent global trade into a tailspin. The recovery in 2010, powered by strong demand in China, started to stoke inflationary pressures, prompting the central bank to tighten policy by guiding the Singapore dollar higher. In 2011, inflation across the region will pose a challenge to Asian policy makers, economists say. 

Standard Chartered Bank economist  Alvin Liew said he sees a 40% chance that the Monetary Authority of Singapore will tighten policy further in 2011, most likely via a one-off appreciation of the Singapore dollar by repositioning the midpoint of the policy band in which the MAS allows the tightly controlled currency to trade. 

"This is due to worries that inflationary concerns may deepen across Asia, and inflation risks for Singapore appear to be tilted towards the upside," Mr. Liew said. 

The MAS uses the exchange rate, rather than interest rates, as its main monetary policy tool because foreign trade dwarfs the island's small domestic economy.

Ahead of a year in which political analysts expect general elections to be announced, Mr. Lee used the New Year's message to again touch on concerns among the local population about the large numbers of foreigners moving to Singapore and crowding out locals from the job market, as well as rising home prices. The island nation has population of about five million. 

"We have to manage the inflow of foreign workers and immigrants, keep home ownership affordable to all, and help low-income Singaporeans cope with the cost of living. We have the means to tackle these problems, and make things better. But in doing so we must remember to keep Singapore open and welcoming to talent," Mr. Lee said. 

A government report published this month said that "since the last quarter of 2009, the government has tightened the framework for granting permanent residency and citizenship to better manage the inflow and raise the quality of new immigrants." 

"Fewer new immigrants were granted permanent residency and citizenship in 2009. The number of PRs (permanent residents) granted in 2010 will also be less than that in 2009," the report said. 

 Write to  Gaurav Raghuvanshi at gaurav.raghuvanshi@dowjones.com and P.R. Venkat at venkat.pr@dowjones.com 