MANAMA—Police firing tear gas and rubber bullets were unable to disperse thousands of mainly Shiite antigovernment protesters who blocked roads and prevented access to buildings in the capital's financial district, posing a further threat to the island's shaky economy. 

After briefly succeeding in pushing back about 350 protesters to their stronghold at Pearl roundabout in the morning, the police were later overwhelmed by thousands of demonstrators who occupied a nearby elevated highway and marched back toward the financial district. By evening, protesters set up a series of roadblocks along the King Faisal Highway running through part of the financial district, in an effort to prevent commuters getting to work Monday morning. 

It was the second major clash between police and protesters since the military was ordered off the streets nearly three weeks ago. On Friday, hundreds were injured in clashes when demonstrators marched on the royal family offices in Riffa, south of the capital, where they were met by police and hundreds of Sunni government loyalists armed with swords, sticks and clubs.

Doctors at the capital's Salmaniya hospital said they treated dozens of people injured during the Sunday clashes in the financial district. Many more were suffering from tear-gas inhalation, they said. "We are seeing injuries due to beating from heavy objects but also swords, knives and rubber bullets," said Ahmed Jamal, a senior surgeon at Salmaniya hospital. "There are hundreds of minor injuries, and we have seen two fractured skulls."

Several eyewitnesses said they saw police fire rubber bullets toward the crowds. 

U.S. officials said the U.S. is worried about a possible military intervention in Bahrain by Saudi Arabia and other Gulf Cooperation Council members to try to quell the protests there, although they said they don't think the Saudis have already started mobilizing forces. 

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

"The U.S. also believes that hard-line members of the opposition have a responsibility to refrain for instigating violence, and that the broader opposition needs to respond to efforts to begin a dialogue," a White House official said. 

The U.S. condemned Sunday's violence in Bahrain. "We urge the government of Bahrain to pursue a peaceful and meaningful dialogue with the opposition rather than resorting to the use of force," the White House said in a statement. 

The disruption to the financial center is likely to further harm Bahrain's economy, which has already suffered from dwindling hotel occupancy and sluggish retail sales during weeks of antigovernment demonstrations. 

In another sign of escalating tensions, some of the injured at Salmaniya hospital said they had been hurt in sectarian clashes that erupted Sunday at Bahrain's university.

Bahrain's royal family has offered a national dialogue on reforms, but opposition groups have yet to enter into the process. 

Bahrain's Crown Prince Sheik Salman Bin Hamad al-Khalifa renewed his call for dialogue in a television appearance after Sunday's violence. He promised that talks would address key opposition demands, such as strengthening the power of Bahrain's parliament.

Moderate opposition leaders are starting to harden their position as a result of the latest violent clashes with police. "When all we see is language of force, and with the government showing no response to political demands since the Crown Prince talked about dialogue, it puts more pressure on Al Wefaq to change their demands," said Abdul Khalil, a senior member of the moderate Shiite Al Wefaq party.

Al Wefaq has been calling for an elected government and a constitutional monarchy, a more-moderate stance than the hard-line Shiite opposition movement Haq, which wants the king to step down. The hard-liners have been organizing protest marches to sensitive locations, such as the financial center and the royal offices, in a bid to put more pressure on the government.

U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates met King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa and the Crown Prince in Bahrain Saturday in a bid to persuade the ruling family to speed internal change. Mr. Gates said "baby steps" on reform aren't sufficient to stave off a deeper crisis in Bahrain. "I told both the king and the crown prince that across the region I did not believe that there could be a return to the status quo ante—that there was change, and it could be led, or it could be imposed," he said. 

Bahrain, which holds a strategic position in the Persian Gulf, hosts the headquarters of the U.S. Fifth Fleet, home to 3,000 military personnel who oversee 30 naval ships and some 30,000 sailors.

The influence of Iran, which is a focus of anxiety for Bahrain and other Gulf states, was a subject of discussion between the U.S. defense secretary and the ruling family. While U.S. officials have been skeptical of Bahraini claims that Iran stoked the uprising, Mr. Gates said he was concerned that Tehran might turn the unrest to its advantage, especially in Shiite-majority Bahrain. 

"There is clear evidence that as the process is protracted, particularly in Bahrain, that the Iranians are looking for ways to exploit it and create problems," he said. 

Mr. Gates said he warned the ruling family in the meetings Saturday that "time is not our friend," because of the potential for Iran to exploit internal discord. Mr. Gates added: "Under the circumstances, and with the impulse behind the political and economic grievances across the region … baby steps probably would not be sufficient to meet the need, that real reform would be necessary."

—Adam Entous and Nathan Hodge  contributed to this article.