TOKYO—Japan's industrial output rose for the second consecutive month in December, the government said, upgrading its assessment of overall production as the pace of growth in exports has started to improve. 

The upgrade in the government's view was the first in five months, and backs recent improvements in other economic indicators suggesting Japan's economy—though still dependent on exports—is coming out of a lull. It comes after ratings agency Standard & Poor's downgraded the country's sovereign-debt rating on Thursday. Rival agency Moody's Investors Service on Monday said its bond rating is stable for now. Moody's added that failure to rein in the fiscal deficit could prompt a review.

In December, Japan's output rose 3.1% for the month following a 1% increase in November, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry said. The improvement beat economists' consensus estimate for a 2.9% rise. 

The ministry forecast a stronger 5.7% rise in January, followed by a 1.2% decline in February, based on its survey of companies. 

It lifted its view of the production trend, saying overall output is picking up. 

"Behind the upgrade of the basic trend assessment were the second consecutive month of increase, the strong rise [in December] and an even stronger growth expected in the next month," a METI official said in a briefing. 

Production of cars and parts for smartphones in particular grew strongly, lifted by higher overseas demand, the official said. 

Separately, the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism reported that housing starts rose 7.5% in December from the same time last year. The figure was much stronger than the 4.6% gain expected by markets, and was the seventh straight month of improvement. Similarly, construction orders rose 13% from a year earlier. 

The housing sector has been seeing a rebound, especially in key urban markets, on the back of a modestly improved employment picture, with the help of tax credits for housing loans. 

The improvement in output data is another silver lining for the Japanese economy, which has been at a standstill since the summer after government stimulus efforts, such as subsidies for new-car purchases, expired and export growth slowed. 

In trade data released by the finance ministry last week, exports picked up again, gaining 13% year-to-year in December. 

Bank of Japan Governor Masaaki Shirakawa also said last week the central bank, while maintaining its overall assessment of the economy, sees encouraging signs, even though it is too early to conclude the economy will return to a path of recovery in the January-March quarter. 

Economists say production is close to ending—or may have ended already—its months-long slump. 

Despite a 1.7% fall in output during the October-December quarter, the latest ministry estimates through February put average growth between January and February at 7.6% over previous quarter, raising the likelihood of the first increase in three quarters, said Mitsumaru Kumagai, chief economist at Daiwa Institute of Research. "The production expansion is spreading to more industries," Mr. Kumagai said. 

Domestic demand for durable goods, including cars and home electronics, is expected to show little improvement in the coming months after the government stimulus waned, but economists expect exports to keep propping up production. 

—William Sposato  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Kazuhiro Shimamura at kazuhiro.shimamura@dowjones.com 