TUCSON, Ariz.—Clarence W. Dupnik, the Pima County sheriff who was thrust into the spotlight after a rampage that killed six and wounded a U.S. congresswoman, is uncommonly direct.

He often eschews "no comments" and vague updates that end in "we can't discuss it," the typical language employed by law-enforcement officials during high-profile criminal investigations. Rather, Mr. Dupnik freely expounds on the problems he sees around him and in his state.

"Arizona is the Tombstone of the United States of America," Mr. Dupnik said at a press conference Sunday at his headquarters, when asked about the state's laws concerning weapons. "I have never been a proponent of letting everybody in this state carry weapons under any circumstances they want. And that's almost where we are."

Mr. Dupnik, who turns 75 years old on Tuesday, was catapulted to the national stage on Saturday when a gunman opened fire outside a local supermarket, killing six and wounding 14 others, including Rep. Gabrielle Giffords. Since then, Mr. Dupnik has been quick to share his views on a variety of matters in a fashion more typical of a career politician a than a career lawman.

Partly, that appears to be a result of friendship. Mr. Dupnik, a Democrat, is friends with the critically injured congresswoman and had a personal relationship with Judge John Roll, the chief of Tucson's federal bench who was slain in the attack.

"I've never seen a tragedy quite this profound," he said in an interview. "It's especially difficult when you know some of the people."

Of course, Mr. Dupnik can hold his tongue with the best of them. At press conferences and in an interview, he declined to answer numerous questions about the progress of the investigation and the suspect, Jared Lee Loughner.

On Sunday afternoon, Mr. Loughner, who is in federal custody, was formally charged with two counts of murder and three counts of attempted murder.

Mr. Dupnik's rhetoric stands in sharp contrast to Arizona's other outspoken septuagenarian cop, Sheriff Joe Arpaio of Maricopa County, which includes Phoenix, about 100 miles northwest of here. Mr. Arpaio makes frequent headlines not only for his positions in favor of the state's tough immigration laws and his unusual way of running the county jail, but for a number of federal investigations of which he has been a target.

And unlike his colleague to the north, who first ran for sheriff in 1992 after a long career as a federal agent, Mr. Dupnik has been in Tucson since he graduated from the University of Arizona and joined the local police department in 1958.

He switched to the Pima County Sheriff's Department in 1977 and was appointed sheriff in 1980. He has been elected since then.

At a press conference Saturday night, roughly eight hours after the shooting, Mr. Dupnik gave a brief statement and then yielded the microphone to a senior Federal Bureau of Investigation official who dispensed limited information, citing the ongoing investigation.

Mr. Dupnik then returned to the podium and unexpectedly provided fresh details on the investigation and quickly made his feelings about the shooting and Mr. Loughner known.

"When you look at unbalanced people, how they respond to the vitriol that comes out of certain mouths about tearing down the government. The anger, the hatred, the bigotry that goes on in this country is getting to be outrageous," he said. "And unfortunately, Arizona…[has] become the mecca for prejudice and bigotry."

Indeed, his own angry rhetoric seemed to quickly divide the people on either side of the political spectrum, but he didn't back down at a press conference the following day where he again took center stage.

Following relatively buttoned-up remarks by FBI Director Robert Mueller, Mr. Dupnik again addressed issues such as antigovernment fervor, lax gun control and what he views as a failed system to deal with the mentally ill.

Still, the sheriff, who has been re-elected six times, has proved popular with Tucson residents, who are clearly as comfortable with his politics as his policing style.

Mark Sawyer, a local high-school teacher who attended a candlelight vigil Saturday night, said he supported Mr. Dupnik despite the sheriff's controversial comments. "He's a good man, he does a good job. He said what he was thinking."

—Andrew Morse contributed to this article.

 Write to  Peter Sanders at peter.sanders@wsj.com 