The sound of falling water follows you everywhere.

The gurgling Bormida River divides Acqui Terme, its wide, shallow course stretching nearly a hundred meters from one bank to the next. A tiered, cascading fountain runs the length of Corso Vigano, a wide road leading to a large round fountain at the center of the Piedmont town's main piazza. Windows in the adjacent Grand Hotel Nuove Terme spa are opaque with steam day and night, the bathing caps of guests inside forming indistinct blotches of color like an impressionist painting in movement.

Outside, cobblestone streets shoot off the main piazza at regular intervals like spokes on a wagon wheel, each filled with strolling couples, families and children. The streets are lined with shops proffering local culinary delights like salami with black truffle, castle-shaped Montebore cheese and Castelmagno.

There are larger thermal bath destinations in Italy—Salsomaggiore in the Emilia-Romagna region, or Saturnia in Tuscany, for example—but Acqui Terme offers visitors an enviable blend of spas, culinary excellence and Italian small-town charm that makes it a wonderful place to kick back and relax. The town has been a wellness destination for almost two millennia, since long before the term existed. But Acqui in recent years has seen major renovations and a brand new wellness spa, as it adjusts to the shift in spa culture from curing ailments to resting and relaxing that many traditional thermal bath destinations are experiencing.

Reminders of the town's intimate connection with hot springs are everywhere; even the name Acqui Terme means "Thermal Waters." In a piazza roughly one hundred meters from the Grand Hotel, steam and a distinct, sulfuric smell issue forth from beneath the marble arches and carved stonework of La Bollente, a fountain built in 1879 by Giovanni Ceruti that is arguably Acqui Terme's most famous landmark. At all hours of the day and late into the night men, women and children can be seen visiting La Bollente (literally "the boiling source"), filling jugs and buckets with the curative waters that rise to the earth's surface here at 75 degrees Celsius.

The town was founded between the first and second centuries B.C. by the Romans, who named it Aquae Statiellae, after the Liguri Statielli, local inhabitants they had to conquer in order to win possession of the area. What was originally a military outpost soon became a thriving urban center, thanks to the town's strategic position halfway between ports on the Ligurian coast and Tortona, where the Via Aemilia connected the region with the rest of the Empire. Archeological digs conducted around town have unearthed thermal baths, a theater, amphitheater, market emporium and massive aqueduct, sections of which can still be seen arching elegantly across the surrounding countryside.

"The Romans calculated everything perfectly," says Lionello Archetti-Maestri, the town archivist. "Even the modern aqueducts that bring drinking water into Acqui draw from exactly the same source the Romans used."

Natural thermal waters rise up from underground in two places in Acqui Terme: at La Bollente, feeding the spas in the nearby Grand Hotel, and on the other side of the Bormida River at the Lago delle Sorgenti (Lake of Hot Springs), where a new spa by the same name was inaugurated last October.

At the spa in the Grand Hotel, guests enjoy saunas, steam baths, hot and cold pools, massages and beauty treatments, padding softly down the hotel's carpeted hallways in white terrycloth slippers and bathrobes from their rooms to the spa facilities downstairs. Special evening programs give people a chance to enjoy the hotel spa after dark before retiring.

Located in the center of Acqui Terme, the Grand Hotel Nuove Terme provides luxury accommodations and a spa nestled in the heart of the building. Double rooms range between €150 and €270 per night, including breakfast.  +39-0144-58555  www.grandhotelacquiterme.it

Perched on a hill above Acqui, Il Cartino Bed & Breakfast gives visitors panoramic views of the Piedmont countryside, immersed in nature just a five-minute drive from the center of town. Rooms range between €60 and €100 per night, including breakfast.  +39-0144-323483  www.ilcartino.com

Family-run restaurant La Schiavia offers guests traditional Piedmont cuisine in an elegant salon with frescoed ceilings. This year marks the restaurant's 25th anniversary. Dinners average €40 per person, including wine. Closed Sunday nights and Tuesdays.  +39-0144-55939  www.laschiavia.it

Traditional Piedmontese restaurant La Curia also has an elegant wine bar located one door down from the restaurant. Dinners average €40 per person including wine. Closed Mondays.  +39-0144-356049  www.enotecalacuria.com

Alfredo Cucina & Vino puts an inventive twist on dishes typical to Piedmontese cuisine. Dinners average Œ30 per person, including wine. Closed Wednesdays.  +39-0144-56586

The Grand Hotel Nuove Terme has an extensive internal spa including Turkish baths, saunas and hot and cold pools, and offers a wide variety of beauty and relaxation treatments, including massages and mudpacks. Guests of the hotel can access the spa free, while visitors pay an entrance fee of €23 weekdays / €32 weekends.  +39-0144-58555  www.grandhotelacquiterme.it

The new Lago delle Sorgenti spa offers a range of relaxation and beauty treatments, including a 12-step spa experience that takes guests through various wellness treatments. Entry to the spa costs €39 per person weekdays / €45 per person weekends. Only 50 guests are allowed in per day.  +39-0144-321860  www.lagodellesorgenti.it

A colonnaded lobby and lofty, stuccoed ceilings give the hotel a yesteryear feel, as if to remind guests that the building has been hosting thermal bathers since the late 1800s.

Across town, visitors to the new Lago delle Sorgenti spa enjoy a considerably different experience, exchanging the Grand Hotel's belle époque feel for the new-age nature of what is every bit a contemporary wellness center. Unlike the hotel, the spa doesn't rent rooms, and only allows 50 guests in at a time to guarantee everyone the space and privacy needed to fully relax. In addition to baths and massages, treatments here are organized along a 12-step "path" that includes rooms dedicated to aromatherapy and sound therapy.

Tomaž Kocjan, a Slovenian spa consultant with almost two decades' experience who currently runs Lago delle Sorgenti, is particularly proud of the last stop along this path—the Gong Lounge—where guests are invited to stretch out on padded lounge chairs and lose themselves in the rich sound of a giant gong struck at intervals. "It may sound funny to someone who hasn't tried it," says Mr. Kocjan, "but people who come here fall in love with the experience."

In Acqui, the cure doesn't stop in the spa, but carries on into the kitchen. With dozens of shops and restaurants lining the streets of the town, eating well is just as much a part of the Acqui experience as relaxing in its thermal waters. This is the heart of Monferrato, a region famous for truffles, cheeses, Barolo wine and dishes like the bagna càuda, a piquant sauce made from olive oil, anchovies and garlic that is usually eaten with seasonal vegetables.

Like everywhere in Italy, cooks exalt local flavors. Roberto Abrile, owner of La Schiavia, one of Acqui Terme's leading restaurants, explains: "We like to use local, seasonal ingredients. The cardo gobbo [hunchbacked thistle] is a perfect example. In the winter, the plant is partly buried to protect it from the cold. The stem bends up out of the ground toward the light, and this white, tender part of the thistle develops a particularly delicious flavor. This time of year, you can find dishes with cardo gobbo served in a lot of local restaurants. It's considered a delicacy."

At La Schiavia, hunchbacked thistle stems were turned into a warm, delicate flan, accompanied by a bagna càuda sauce and a glass of local Barbera wine, and while the words "hunchback" and "thistle" don't generally set people's mouths watering, in Mr. Abrile's restaurant the result was downright delightful.

Although good food and warm waters still draw tourists to Acqui, "the town's true heyday was probably between the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the Second World War," says Mr. Archetti-Maestri. "They built a new theater and casino, and the Nuove Terme were erected right in the center of town. During the 1930s, the thermal-bath facilities were expanded considerably, including construction of the giant public swimming pool that was for a long time the largest in Europe."

Visitors interested in learning more about the town's history may want to visit the Archeological Museum of Acqui Terme, located in the Castello dei Paleologi on a hilltop in the center of town. Through six small but carefully organized rooms, the museum displays artworks and artifacts discovered in and around Acqui, tracing the course of human activity in this area from carved and polished stones dating to the Paleolithic period to statuary and gravestones from the medieval era.

One of the exhibits displays a ring of stones from a large circular Roman bath recovered during excavations conducted in Piazza della Bollente. Experts have traced these stones to Greece, identifying the marble as the same used to build the Parthenon, providing further testimony of the town's importance during the Roman period. A grassy terrace outside the museum affords an excellent view over the surrounding town.

Now, new efforts and energies are being dedicated to boosting tourism in Acqui Terme. Gabriella Pistone, president of Terme di Acqui SpA, the company that owns and manages the town's thermal-bath centers, compares it to waking from a long, deep sleep.

"Acqui Terme has been in hibernation," says Ms. Pistone. "Thermal baths across Europe have been experiencing a crisis over the past decade, and Acqui was no exception. The number of people who come for medical reasons has been dropping, and new clientele were going to wellness centers, to spas designed only for relaxation. Fewer and fewer people were coming to visit."

This is a problem thermal destinations all over Italy have had to come to grips with. Gianna Melis, an Italian journalist who has been writing about spas and wellness destinations for over a decade, notes: "In 2000 Italy passed a law that changed the way people could use thermal baths. Before, they could use their sick days to visit a spa; now they have to take vacation days and only have the right to go once a year. Even worse, while treatments like mudpacks and water rehabilitation are still covered by national health insurance, people have to contribute to the cost of the cures, and pay for their hotel stay themselves. This makes it much harder to use thermal baths for curative purposes, and takes away an enormous segment of the clientele. Today even historically important medicinal thermal bath locations have to cater to wellness and relaxation customers in order to survive."

In Acqui Terme, change came in 2009, when Terme di Acqui SpA decided to overhaul the town's bath facilities. "We've always had the natural thermal waters," says Ms. Pistone, "but we weren't equipped for the new kind of spa clientele that are driving today's market, people who are looking more to relax than to cure some ailment. We're concentrating on making Acqui desirable to them as well."

The results—the Lago delle Sorgenti spa, covered tennis courts open year-round and a completely renovated Nuove Terme spa next to the Grand Hotel—help make the town more attractive as a wellness destination for people suffering from nothing more troubling than an ardent desire to escape daily stress and relax.

No matter the reasons for coming, a weekend spent basking in thermal waters, dining on succulent Piedmont specialties and strolling along Acqui's quiet cobblestone streets produces a sense of well-being that's hard to beat.