NEW DELHI -- The top economic adviser to the Indian prime minister has cut his estimate on the country's growth by half a percentage point, citing high inflation, and warned that ballooning subsidies will be a risk to the government's budget deficit target.

C. Rangarajan, chairman of the Prime Minister's Economic Advisory Council, said in an interview late Thursday that he expects the economy to grow 8.5% in the fiscal year that began April 1.

He is the first government official to cut expectations on economic growth and his comments come a day after the finance ministry's chief economic adviser, Kaushik Basu, flagged the need to revise India's growth expectations for the fiscal year.

The government had forecast the economy to grow about 9% this fiscal year, after an expected 8.6% expansion in the past year. On Tuesday, the central bank said it expects the economy to expand about 8% in fiscal 2012 and inflation to remain high through the middle of the year as it raised policy rates by half a percentage point to tame prices.

"Persistence of high inflation is inimical to medium-term growth," Mr. Rangarajan said.

India's inflation, mostly driven by costlier foods, has been uncomfortably high for more than a year, despite the Reserve Bank of India raising key interest rates nine times since March last year. According to latest data available, inflation based on the wholesale price index accelerated at 8.98% in March, faster than February's pace of 8.31%.

Mr. Rangarajan, also a former head of the central bank, expects inflation to start easing from October and come down to 6.5% by March 2012 as an expected good harvest of summer-sown crops would cool food prices.

The Reserve Bank of India would continue to be on a tight vigil on the pricing pressure, he said. "The central bank will continue to follow a policy of tightening until inflation shows definite signs of decline."

"The primary concern of the central bank is with inflation and if inflation rate comes down, let us say, to less than 7%, then perhaps the RBI might just stop further tightening," he added.

The government should also help the central bank in its fight to tame prices by trying to stick to its budgeted fiscal deficit aim, he said.

India's ability to adhere to the fiscal deficit aim of 4.6% of gross domestic product is becoming increasingly difficult as boiling crude oil prices raise chances of subsidies to spill over estimates.

Nymex crude oil futures for June delivery are trading around $100 a barrel in Asia Friday. The price has fallen in recent days, but is still higher compared with $91.38 on Dec. 31.

"The biggest contribution that fiscal policy can make is to ensure that fiscal deficit doesn't exceed the budgeted aim and that itself will be a difficult task," Mr. Rangarajan said.

India subsidizes diesel, cooking gas, fertilizers and food among others to shield consumers from global price shocks.

But the mammoth subsidy bill--budgeted at 1.44 trillion rupees ($32.21 billion) this fiscal year--strains the government's coffers and makes it difficult to adhere to medium-term fiscal rigor under which the government is tasked to shrink the budget deficit to 3.5% by March 2014.

Mr. Rangarajan said he expects the government to "take some action" to limit fuel subsidies at the budgeted level. He didn't specify whether such an action calls for an immediate hike in the price of diesel.

 Write to  Prasanta Sahu at prasanta.sahu@dowjones.com and Abhrajit Gangopadhyay at Abhrajit.gangopadhyay@dowjones.com 