British interior designer Peter Dunham has been living in Los Angeles since 1997. His easy and informal style is a perfect fit for the relaxed Californian way of life, and his client list includes Jennifer Garner, Jessica Biel and Juicy Couture co-founder Pamela Levy. The key to his look is balance, be it of color, patterns or symmetry. It's an idea he kept returning to during our chat about his approach to decorating the living room of his home, a 1928 Spanish California Bungalow in West Hollywood. His house sits behind La Cienega Boulevard, which is packed with antiques shops, including Mr. Dunham's own: Hollywood at Home. 

Here's a closer look at the room.

This room was part of a 1980s addition, and the walls are all cinder block rather than the plaster found in the rest of the house. In order to disguise the walls' roughness, he covered them with a raffia-texture wallcovering, which was cheaper than skim coating or layering the walls with fabric. Mr. Dunham used a paper that gives the room a wonderful neutral background for the furniture. 

Here, we break down the strategies at play and suggest some accessories to help complete the look.

Mismatching pattern is something Mr. Dunham is a master at. I love the way this room feels as though it came together over time. The sofa and curtain fabrics are the room's obvious cornerstone patterns. The sofa is covered in a light linen from Mr. Dunham's own collection called Samarkand. The curtains are made up in Mr. Dunham's ikat stripe material with a dark background. While they don't match in the traditional sense, they complement one another. The combination of light and dark is something Mr. Dunham keeps returning to, as seen in the light green stripe on the small sofa to the right and then the rich velvet stripe on the deco chair in  the foreground. Ikat Pomegranate curtain fabric and Samarkand Red sofa fabric, both $93/yard, peterdunhamtextiles.com 

To lighten up the upholstery's denseness—or "puddingness," as Mr. Dunham calls it—he introduced the wooden and rush furniture. Upholstered furniture is almost always the most comfortable, the more "pudding-y" it looks the more comfortable it generally is. Mixing "sculptural boney pieces with nice fat pieces," as Mr. Dunham says, makes a huge difference to the room's greater balance. The rush seats add texture without introducing yet another fabric. When you find yourself putting together a room, remember that you can bring a natural material into the mix, to prevent pattern overkill. Mr. Dunham describes it as "varying the notes of the symphony with the materials." Bobbin chair, $1,975, hollywoodathome.com 

While this room's symmetry doesn't make a big showy deal out of itself, its central pieces are arranged to achieve an evenness. Look at the sofa with the pair of Robsjohn Gibbons side tables and '50s lamps. Again showing his bent for a carefully calibrated balance, Mr. Dunham knows that some places want symmetry and others don't so he offset the sofa configuration with what he calls the "higgledy-piggledyness of the rest of the room." I particularly like the way the rush chairs are set at varying angles. David Cressey ceramic lamp, $4,200, downtown20.net 

This is a calm room without a huge amount of color; apart from the red curtains, the upholstery is fairly neutral. Laying a mellow foundation allows for the high-impact burst of cheer that comes from the vase of sunflowers. It's easy to forget how you can bring color into a room with relatively disposable things rather than building it into the room's actual "design." There's nothing wrong with leaving a few gaps in a room as they very often fill themselves without too much thought. The other nice colorful detail is that green ceramic stool right in the foreground. You don't need anything too huge or deliberate to prevent a room from becoming totally beige. If you are nervous about committing to color, take note. Kantha pillow cover, $49, potterybarn.com and Suzani sun pillow, $250, jaysonhomeandgarden.com 