On his new album "Towards the Sun" (Zero Summer), the Scottish folk singer-songwriter Alexi Murdoch strips down his arrangements to the essentials. There's muted brass and the occasional chiming piano, but none of the driving percussion and looped electric guitars of his earlier recordings. Thus his taut, hypnotic finger-picking on his old Gibson acoustic guitars provides the platform for his conversational singing style. The stark effect creates an intimate bond between singer and listener.

Mr. Murdoch will appear at the Music Hall of Williamsburg in New York on Thursday. Sam Amidon will open the show.

"This new music," Mr. Murdoch said by phone last week, "has evolved into a place that's more quiet, more intimate. In an age in which everything is bright and shouting, I wonder if it's too dark."

Mr Murdoch's music seems to come from another era, perhaps the late 1960s or early '70s. Accordingly, he's often compared to Nick Drake and John Martyn, two British guitarists of that period, though neither comparison is valid: Mr. Drake employed exotic tunings, while Mr. Martyn would alter the acoustic sound with effects normally reserved for electric-guitar players. Mr. Murdoch's playing is different from theirs—and still developing.

"It came to me recently that I have a guitar style," said the 27-year-old. "It has become an integral part. It's like a second voice for me."

Neither Messrs. Drake nor Martyn influenced Mr. Murdoch's music, he said. "My first impressions are of classical music. My mother played piano, the staples—Bach, Beethoven, Mozart. I kind of got into Pink Floyd, if I got into any one band. It gave me a sense of what could be accomplished with soundscapes. The folky thing didn't appear until I started doing it." He finds the Drake references mildly irksome, but said, "It's not the worst comparison. I love Nick Drake as well."

The gig at the Music Hall of Williamsburg gives Mr. Murdoch a chance to set up shop, however temporarily, in Brooklyn, where he's resided briefly in recent years, subletting apartments and catching up with musical friends. "It's my America foothold," he said of the borough. "I find it quite the exciting place creatively." He recorded parts of "Towards the Sun" at Saltlands Studios in Dumbo, where Brooklyn's Jon Natchez, Kelly Pratt, Kyle Resnick and Jim Smith added horn parts. When he's not on the road, Mr. Murdoch resides two hours outside of Glasgow.

At the Williamsburg show, Mr. Murdoch will mix songs from "Towards the Sun" and his 2006 debut album, "Time Without Consequence"—a disc perhaps best known for the regular appearance of its songs in more than a dozen television shows, including episodes of "Dawson's Creek," "Grey's Anatomy," "House," "The O.C.," "Ugly Betty" and others. Given his first disc's success, one might have thought Mr. Murdoch would have moved quickly to capitalize on its momentum. But, he said, his songwriting can't be rushed.

"I'd even say it's antisongwriting, in a way. It happens in fragments over time. I have to allow those fragments to come in. It's a bit of a mysterious process to me. It's weird. I really feel like I'm so removed from the business and the industry. At times, it causes anxiety—I wonder if I should be working on building a boat or something instead. I don't concern myself with expectations. I was surprised by the success of 'Time Without Consequences.' The fact that people seem to care, I'm gobsmacked by that."

 Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock.  