California cities such as Los Angeles and Fremont are rushing to commit tax money to new buildings, street repairs and additional blight-removal projects, ahead of Gov. Jerry Brown's drive to spend the funds on other state priorities.

The California governor's move, which would dismantle local redevelopment agencies to free up money for schools, municipalities and other local entities, is an early test of his strategy to dig the nation's most populous state out of a $25.4 billion budget hole.

Mr. Brown's plan, included in his proposed budget this month, comes as cash-strapped officials from Wisconsin to Ohio have pushed for overhauls of economic-development programs whose effectiveness is unproven.

State law lets cities and counties create redevelopment agencies as a funding mechanism to cure blight through public improvements that lure private investment, generate jobs and boost tax revenue. When a city designates an area for redevelopment, the local agency sells bonds to finance projects. The agency then uses any resulting increase in local property-tax revenue, which in other cases would go to schools and local governments, to pay off the bond debt and fund other community improvements; schools and municipalities receive a smaller share of the increase.

The agencies have recently received increasing sums of property-tax revenue, and the state has used its coffers to make sure schools have enough funding.

Mr. Brown's plan for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2012, would shift about $1.7 billion from redevelopment to the state's low-income health-insurance program and to trial courts. Later, the money would be shared by local governments and schools.

Two weeks ago, the Community Redevelopment Agency of Los Angeles agreed to commit $930 million in current and future tax revenue to a transit plaza and other projects, a deal that awaits a city council vote. Other cities quickly followed suit, with officials in Fremont last week authorizing as much as $140 million in bond sales to build a local train station, among other projects. Meanwhile, Long Beach committed $886 million in property-tax proceeds through 2021 to improvements such as maintaining parks, libraries and roads, along with debt repayment. 

"For our little town, these funds are critical, because they really drive economic development," said Joe Heckel, community development director in Grass Valley where the city council last week committed funds to a highway interchange and other projects. "We're not building golf courses, shopping malls—we're really building infrastructure in our area."

In a report last week, the Legislative Analyst's Office said the cities' actions could "constrain the state's ability to redirect redevelopment revenues and to realize the state savings and local benefits anticipated in the administration's proposal."

The office, which advises the state legislature, pressed for urgent passage of a bill to suspend new redevelopment work. Meanwhile, the state controller has launched a review of the use of redevelopment funds and the legality of the agencies' workings. 

In a speech last week, Mr. Brown defended his proposal to eliminate redevelopment funds. "If we don't do redevelopment, what do we take?" he asked at a gathering of city officials. "Do we take more from the universities? Do we start cutting into the public schools, which have been cut year after year?"

On Wednesday, Mr. Brown met with the mayors of California's largest cities, who oppose his plan. After the meeting, San Jose Mayor Chuck Reed stressed the cities' need for redevelopment funds. "Collectively, we all rely on those tools to get jobs in difficult areas and to keep jobs in California," he said, adding, "Take away those tools and we're going to lose more jobs."

Measuring the effect of redevelopment efforts is difficult. Pasadena's Old Town and San Diego's Gaslamp Quarter have succeeded, but othersuch projects have floundered. In Costa Mesa, a mall partly paid for with redevelopment funds in the early 1990s now is largely vacant. 

"The general picture on redevelopment is that it doesn't really pay for itself," said Tracy Gordon, a local-finance expert at the Brookings Institution think tank in Washington, mentioning an oft-cited 1998 study by the nonpartisan Public Policy Institute of California that found the redevelopment agencies' work didn't increase property values enough to justify the tax revenue spent.

 Write to  Vauhini Vara at vauhini.vara@wsj.com 