Mounting worries about Japan's ability to contain and recover quickly from a nuclear disaster jolted the world's financial markets and economy Tuesday, underscoring a sharp shift in recent weeks in the risks facing the global recovery.



Japan's role in global supply chains

International companies from  BMW AG
BMW


-1.18
%




 to  Boeing Co.
BA


-0.69
%




 girded for possible disruptions to supply chains, as the world's third-largest economy faced worry about radioactive contamination and was imposing rolling power outages to cope with the crippling blow the quake has dealt to its electricity grid. 

In global markets Tuesday, stocks and commodities fell and currencies gyrated, amid the Japanese uncertainties as well as escalating tensions in the Middle East.

"The world is rapidly becoming a scarier place," said  Torsten Slok, chief international economist at Deutsche Bank Securities in New York. "Investors' reaction can certainly amplify the impact on the recovery."

Japan's Nikkei index fell about 11% Tuesday, bringing to 17.5% its drop since the earthquake struck Friday, although in midday trading Wednesday shares had gained 4.4%. In the U.S. Tuesday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged more than 296 points before recovering to finish down 137.74 points, or 1.15%, at 11855.42.

Crude-oil futures for April delivery were down 4% in New York to $97.18 a barrel, and copper declined by a lesser amount, amid expectations of curtailed demand from Japan. 

The cost of insuring against a bond default by the Japanese government soared 51% from last week as investors worried about how Japan, whose debt as a share of annual output is the largest among advanced economies, will shoulder the costs of reconstruction. 

All this shows how much the global economic picture has changed since the beginning of the year. Then, concerns focused on how inflation in emerging Asia, plus Europe's debt troubles, might affect an accelerating recovery led by manufacturers. Now—with Japan in crisis and much of the Mideast and North Africa in turmoil—economists and executives are scrambling to assess the implications for factors ranging from auto production to the price of semiconductors. 

Economists see the growing tensions in the Middle East and North Africa, with attendant high oil prices, as the chief new threat to global growth. Despite recent declines, oil is up about 10% since mid-December, the start of the protests that ultimately brought down Tunisia's president. 

In the longer term, Japan's troubles could add to the upward pressure on oil prices as the country uses more fossil fuel to replace lost nuclear capacity. Mr. Slok of Deutsche Bank Securities estimates that a sustained rise in oil to $110 a barrel could shave 0.4 percentage point off world economic growth this year, and that a rise to $150 could knock off a full 2 percentage points.

As bad news has proliferated in Japan, some analysts were less certain the nation would recover from the disaster as fast as they had been hoping. Japanese auto makers and other factories extended closures for several more days at least, potentially imperiling deliveries of such products as Prius cars and the flash chips that go into iPhones and iPads. 

Tens of thousands of tourists have canceled trips to and from Japan. Taiwan's  EVA Airways
2618


1.15
%




 said it will cancel 56 flights between Japan and Taiwan, including some through the end of June. 

Still, many economists believe that, barring a full-blown nuclear catastrophe, Japan's crisis will ultimately have a minimal impact on global growth. 

When advanced economies suffer disasters, the normal pattern is a temporary slowdown as production seizes up, followed by a rebound a few months later once reconstruction spending takes hold. 

Also, Japan's share of global output is smaller than it used to be. IHS Global Insight estimates the disaster could shave a "negligible" 0.1 to 0.2 percentage point from this year's global economic growth, followed by a similar boost next year. 

Changyong Rhee, chief economist at the Asian Development Bank in Manila, said he thinks Asian companies have enough flexibility to adjust to most issues Japan could face. 

Many Japanese companies have already moved much of their production overseas to places like Thailand, making them less reliant on domestic production and infrastructure, he notes.

Nonetheless, the longer disruptions in Japan last, the greater the effect on the supply chains of global manufacturers. Japan is the world's fourth-largest exporter, accounting for about 14% of exports of automotive products. It also produces 60% of the silicon used to make semiconductor chips, according to IHS Global Insight.

Japan is a key supplier of advanced components to Asian nations that specialize in the final assembly phase of manufacturing. China depends on Japan for 13% of its imports, largely capital goods such as machine tools and electronic parts for manufacturing. On Tuesday, prices for some computer components were up as much as 10%, as worried companies hoarded supplies, according to IHS. 

"My business will be badly affected," said  Y. T. Chong, managing director of Eita Electric, a Malaysian company that supplies circuit breakers and other products for high-rise buildings. Many of the parts are made at two factories in Japan. "I cannot source this from any other country," he said, "because these items are sold under a well-known Japanese brand, and therefore it has to come from Japan."

Mr. Chong said two consignments valued at $200,000 are held up indefinitely because of problems at Japan's Yokohama port and other issues. He expects future orders to be affected, too, because power shortages have stopped production at the factories involved.

In Germany, BMW is investigating how quickly it might face supply-chain disruptions, said the car maker's purchasing chief, Herbert Diess. While BMW has a good inventory of most components it gets directly from Japan, such as gear boxes, it is less sure about the status of indirect suppliers that provide electronic components for digital displays, navigation systems and other electrical equipment. 

In the U.S., aircraft producer Boeing has said airplane production could be hit if disruptions to parts makers last for several weeks. 

The devastation and loss of life from the earthquake and tsunami are limited to a few areas in Japan. But the economic aftermath is nationwide. 

Supplier logistics are severely dislocated by restrictions on using highways for freight, as well as unpredictable power cuts that make operations planning difficult. Meanwhile, the shadow of the ongoing nuclear crisis is making companies reluctant to ask staff to report for work until the situation clears.

Underscoring the nationwide scope, Mazda Motor Corp. on Tuesday said it's suspending all domestic plant operations until March 20. Honda Motor Co. has closed plants in Japan until Sunday, while Nissan Motor Co. has four plants shut until Wednesday and two others until Friday. 

Toyota Motor Co. has so far confirmed closures through Wednesday, putting the level of vehicle production lost at 40,000. Toyota is also halting overtime production at some plants in North America as a precautionary measure in case there is a disruption in parts supply.



One of the biggest headaches for Japanese manufacturers is the rolling power cuts—and those may last through the end of April, according to Tokyo Electric Power Co. Economists at IHS estimated that 10% of Japan's electricity generation capacity would be offline for the next few months.

Japan's crisis could lead to increased purchases of certain items. Executives at India's Essar Steel Ltd. and state-run Steel Authority of India Ltd. said they expected exports of finished steel to Japan to climb in the coming months as the country rebuilds and some owners of wooden buildings along Japan's coastline replace them with sturdier structures. Thailand's Thai Union Frozen Products PCL, the world's biggest canned-tuna producer by sales, projected increased sales to Japan because of damage to areas with seafood processing plants.

Developments in financial markets will play an important role in determining how heavily Japan's troubles weigh on the country's own finances and the global recovery. 

Gyrating stock prices could dampen the consumer confidence needed to sustain and broaden growth. Any rise in the cost of financing the government's debt burden, which exceeds 200% of Japan's annual economic output, could aggravate a fiscal situation that led ratings firms to downgrade Japanese bonds earlier this year. 

The added strain on Japan's finances comes at a time when the debt troubles of Greece and other European countries have focused investors' attention on the possibility of defaults among large advanced nations. However, while the cost of insuring against a default by Japan has jumped, yields on Japanese bonds rose only slightly Tuesday.

"I don't think we can take for granted that the bond markets will take things in stride in the current fiscal environment," said Maurice Obstfeld, an economist at the University of California, Berkeley.

—Bob Davis, Justin Lahart  and Yoshio Takahashi  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Patrick Barta at patrick.barta@wsj.com and Mark Whitehouse at mark.whitehouse@wsj.com 