WASHINGTON—Now that U.S. officials say allied forces have established an effective no-fly zone over Libya to hem in the Gadhafi regime's attacks on rebels, Western leaders have another issue to confront: What to do next. 

As quickly as missiles and bombers struck along the Libyan coast to take out Col. Moammar Gadhafi's air power and defenses, divisions emerged among the coalition that voted the plan into effect Thursday under the aegis of the United Nations. Risks to President Barack Obama's minimalist approach toward war in Libya were emerging, with Arab support so far limited and disputes over the terms of the engagement.

Leaders in Britain and France made clear they hoped to force Col. Gadhafi's ouster through the show of force, but that wasn't an official goal of the U.S. or of the U.N. Security Council resolution authorizing the campaign. Some American lawmakers and security strategists criticized the White House Sunday for failing to more clearly define the mission.

Some U.S. and European officials said the airstrikes would lead to a mutiny against Col. Gadhafi. But the White House didn't detail what might happen should the Libyan dictator hang on to power and make good on his pledge to lead an insurgency against rebel and Western forces.

Some rebel leaders said the help came too late, though there were celebrations and an apparent respite from attacks around their command center in Benghazi. The Arab League. whose support was pivotal to the move, said the campaign was overstepping its bounds, and among league members only Qatar made clear it was joining in. 

The weekend's airstrikes appear to have weakened Col. Gadhafi's forces and revived the struggling rebel movement for the moment. "We have halted him in the vicinity of Benghazi, which is where he was most recently on the march," said Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff, on NBC's "Meet the Press" Sunday.

What comes after that is less clear. Both Mr. Obama and French President Nikolas Sarkozy said they are open to a diplomatic dialogue to end the conflict. Few military planners in Washington, Paris, or London held out much hope Tripoli would respond.

"It's very uncertain on how this ends," Adm. Mullen said on CBS's "Face the Nation." Asked if it could end in a stalemate with Col. Gadhafi, Mullen replied: "I don't think that's for me to answer. Certainly, I recognize that's a possibility."

The Libyan strikes are perhaps the clearest example of the Obama foreign-policy doctrine in action. Mr. Obama set two parameters for his advisers: no U.S. action unless others take the lead and no American ground troops.

"It underscores these actions are international in nature," said Ben Rhodes, a deputy national security advisor.

In contrast to his predecessor, President George W. Bush, who invaded Iraq in 2003 despite opposition from many allies, Mr. Obama took pains-and time-to secure legal authority through the United Nations and support from Arab states. He then sought to let France and Britain lead the military charge.

U.S. and European officials lauded the Arab League's backing. On Sunday, Qatar deployed four Mirage 2000 warplanes to help enforce the no-fly zone, the first example of significant Arab involvement. But on Sunday, the head of the Arab League, Amr Moussa, a candidate in Egypt's presidential election, said the League's support didn't include bombing campaigns that could endanger Libyan civilians.

Arab and Western diplomats said two key U.S. allies with extensive military arsenals, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, have yet to commit to any significant role. Their leaders have been alienated from Washington since the ouster of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and U.S. criticism of Saudi Arabia's role in snuffing out a political uprising in Bahrain. "No one is rushing to help right now," said a senior Arab official involved in the discussions. 

National Security Adviser Tom Donilon said Sunday the U.S. has been engaged with civilian and military Arab leaders about their participation. "You'll see those participation decisions announced by those countries over the coming days," he said. Mr. Obama consulted with King Abdullah of Jordan on Sunday, a day after calling the crown prince of the United Arab Emirates, Mr. Donilon said.

President Obama and other senior U.S. officials said repeatedly the military operations weren't a "regime change" exercise. They publicly ruled out the introduction of U.S. ground forces into Libya. But both France and the U.K. are taking a more hawkish line.

British officials talk of success defined as deposing the Libyan leader. Prime Minister David Cameron talks of the dangers of allowing a "failed rogue" state "festering" south of Europe in a position to sponsor terrorism. U.K. leaders haven't ruled out using ground forces.

  Malcolm Chalmers, a professor at Kings College, London, said the North Atlantic Treaty Organization no-fly zone over Kosovo in the 1990s was undermined by Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic, who placed military personnel in civilian areas and hid military assets. In the end, it was the threat of ground forces that proved decisive. "You quickly run out of targets and they quickly adapt their tactics," says Mr. Chalmers.

The Obama administration hasn't firmly addressed what steps Washington and its allies would take if Col. Gadhafi holds on, a position that drew criticism from Republicans Sunday who otherwise welcomed the military intervention.

"The administration has a responsibility to define for the American people, the Congress, and our troops what the mission in Libya is, better explain what America's role is in achieving that mission, and make clear how it will be accomplished," John Boehner (R., Ohio), speaker of the House of Representatives, said in a written statement Sunday.

Security analysts fear Western airpower could decapitate Tripoli's military command but not swing the balance of power firmly in the rebels' favor, leading to protracted civil strife and a splintering of the Mediterranean country. Ungoverned areas, meanwhile, could provide sanctuary for al Qaeda and other militant Islamist groups that are active in northern Africa.

"The risk is that the no-fly zone became a cover for a widening civil war," said  Emile El-Hokayem, a Bahrain-based Mideast analyst for the International Institute for Strategic Studies. "It's not clear if the Obama administration has firmly grasped this."

—Alistair MacDonald contributed to this article

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com and Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 