PARIS—The list of high-profile guests is growing for an international currency seminar later this month in Nanjing, China, where Beijing has indicated a greater willingness to discuss its foreign-exchange policy.

French President Nicolas Sarkozy has staked his yearlong presidency of the Group of 20 industrialized and emerging nations on getting China to talk about its currency at international gatherings. After a rough start, it now seems the Chinese are prepared to meet him halfway. 

The seminar in China's former capital is part of Paris's efforts to get the G-20 to discuss how to embrace a multicurrency system, rather than a U.S.-led one, as a way to curb currency volatility, which hampers growth. Such a discussion, the French believe, could nudge China to appreciate its currency—something Beijing has so far opposed.

China initially resisted the Nanjing seminar, with several officials indicating they wanted a lower-profile event that avoided discussing changes to the international monetary system. Beijing still is unenthusiastic, and seminar organizers say they are simply trying to fulfill their role as G-20 members by holding the session. 

The U.S. considers the Nanjing meeting a distraction from a wider G-20 effort to figure out ways to measure progress toward global "rebalancing"—that is, getting China to rely less on export-led growth. The next formal G-20 meeting on the subject is scheduled to take place in Washington shortly before the International Monetary Fund's April meeting. 

The list of high-profile guests at the Nanjing seminar is growing, however. Several people close to the event said IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn, German Finance Minister Wolfang Schäuble, Russian Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet and Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney, among others, will attend the seminar, over which. French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde will preside. 

Elena Salgado, the Spanish finance minister, is also planning to attend, said a person familiar with the situation. The U.S. Treasury hasn't decided what level of representation to send. On the Chinese side, Zhou Xiaochuan, governor of the People's Bank of China, will be part of the Chinese delegation, several people close to the event said. 

At the political level, Wang Qishan, vice premier and Communist Party politburo member in charge of financial and economic issues, is likely to accompany Mr. Sarkozy to Nanjing, where the French president will open the seminar, said a Chinese participant who is involved in the planning. Mr. Sarkozy will also travel to Beijing after the seminar to hold bilateral talks with Chinese President Hu Jintao.

"I don't see any of the big names missing," one of the people involved in the organization said. He added that a high-octane presence wouldn't necessarily lead to a major policy breakthrough, but "it certainly demonstrates goodwill on the part of China."

In what could bode well for the coming seminar, China last month made a significant concession to its fellow G-20 members, agreeing at a meeting in Paris to include foreign exchange as one of the indicator that will be used by the group to assess whether any member is pursing macroeconomic policies that hinder global growth.

Still, the jury is still out on what the Nanjing meeting can actually achieve. "I don't have high hopes for the Sarkozy meeting. Without U.S. support (for changes in the international financial system), there won't be a very substantial shift," said  Xia Bin, a member of the PBOC's monetary-advisory committee and a senior researcher at Chinese government think tank.

Key to watch for at the meeting will be what China says on the role of the IMF's Special Drawing Rights, or SDRs, in the global monetary system. France believes including the yuan in the SDR basket could down the line encourage a faster appreciation of the yuan; the U.S. has stressed, however, that the yuan can only be included in the SDR basket if Beijing liberalizes its currency policy. Hu Xioalian, vice governor of the PBOC, was noncommittal when addressing the issue at a meeting last week in Paris.

Other items on the Nanjing agenda will be how to better monitor capital flows and global liquidity, how to strengthen financial safety nets in order to cope with systemic crises and how to promote the internationalization of emerging currencies, according to a French official. Mr. Strauss-Kahn is also likely to unveil the broad outline of the IMF's interim report on a proposed overhaul of the international monetary system that will be presented to the G-20 in April. 

 Write to  Nathalie Boschat at nathalie.boschat@dowjones.com and Bob Davis at bob.davis@wsj.com 