Inventor Dean Kamen, of insulin pump and Segway two-wheeled transporter fame, turns 60 in April. But when he stepped into a New Hampshire college gym early in January, he looked a lot like the teenagers who greeted his arrival with thunderous applause: He was wearing a faded blue-denim work shirt, jeans and scruffy sneakers and showing a certain nerdy intensity. Little wonder: Mr. Kamen was there to kick off the 20th season of a high-school robotics competition known as For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology—better known by its acronym, First. 

During the event, broadcast live to 70 other locations across the country, Mr. Kamen introduced Neal Bascomb, the author of "The New Cool," a book about the ways in which Mr. Kamen has used robotics to create a cachet of geekiness among students. Two decades ago, Mr. Bascomb writes, the inventor realized that most American teenagers he met worshipped sports and entertainment idols but couldn't name a single living scientist. Alarmed, Mr. Kamen launched First to bring some sports-like hoopla to science and engineering. The initial event, in 1992, drew 28 entries. This year's competition has nearly 2,000 teams in three leagues for elementary, middle and high schools; the New York City-area regional, one of the largest, takes place this weekend at the Javits Convention Center and involves 66 teams. My son's team, from a New York City public high school, will participate, which makes me an exacting, if not strictly impartial, judge of "The New Cool."

Mr. Bascomb, firmly aboard the Kamen bandwagon, presents the book as a sports story, following a First team through the contest's 18th season. Jan. 3, 2009: A car snakes down California's coastal Highway 101 at 4:30 a.m. The occupants: four members of the robotics team from the Dos Pueblos high school in Goleta, Calif., near Santa Barbara. Their destination: a UCLA auditorium, where they will hear Mr. Kamen's broadcast announcing the 2009 kickoff. The car's occupants: coach Amir Abo-Shaeer, a physics teacher of Iraqi background; his blond wife, Emily, of Mormon background; and two seniors with immigrant backgrounds, John (Korean) and Kevin (Polish).

Other characters who soon appear include Chase, a learning-disabled student with a genius for spatial relationships; Gabe, an awkward kid who likes theater but slowly realizes that computer programming is more exciting; and Andrew, a cellist who saves the day by turning out robot parts on the school lathe. All are seniors in a suburban public high school of about 2,300 students that struggles with apathy, drugs and dropouts.

Another feel-good melting-pot story? Yes, in a way. But don't worry; this one is authentic, and it offers a lesson in how American kids can thrive when faced with daunting challenges.

The 2009 robotics competition, dubbed "Lunacy," required designing and building robots that would ally with others to collect balls ("moon rocks") on a slippery ("moonlike") surface. The Dos Pueblos students are stymied at first, and team meetings dissolve into bickering. Meanwhile, coach Abo-Shaeer fights the indifference of his school district, which has spent $5.9 million to build an Olympic-size swimming pool but won't give him money or space to build a robot. Nevertheless, he coaxes the team onward. It produces an innovative design and ends up at the national championship in Atlanta at the Georgia Dome. Along the way, of course, the team members learn as much about themselves as about engineering.

 By Neal Bascomb  (Crown, 337 pages, $25)

Mr. Bascomb is not the most elegant writer, and his prose tends toward the cliché (an opposing team "racked up a double-digit lead"; students are described as "like kids on Christmas morning"). He also skirts problematic aspects of First. It is a nonprofit operation, but it's an expensive undertaking for participants. Initial registration is $6,500 for high-school teams, a fee that covers the basic hardware and software kit. But teams may need another $10,000 or more to pay for competition entry fees, travel and more hardware and equipment—a heavy burden for schools facing budget cuts and already sorely tempted to ditch the machine shops used to build robots and rely instead on risk-free computers. As a result, First teams can end up spending a lot of time on fund raising and public relations.

From the parents' point of view, the long nights and weekends during the intense six-week robotics "build" season can take a toll on their kids' academic performance and family lives. Nevertheless, the compensations are immense. "The New Cool" is effective in capturing the students' loyalty, dedication and ingenuity. It is inspiring to see these kids work so hard and achieve a certain level of engineering expertise and high-school celebrity. As the book chronicles the success of the First program, though, it inevitably raises troubling questions about whether America can regain its leadership in science and engineering even with Mr. Kamen's inventive approach.

At the First launch in January, where Mr. Bascomb was introduced, Mr. Kamen also brought out rapper Will.i.am of the Black Eyed Peas. Mr. Kamen gave a First cap to the performer and suggested that if Will wanted to look truly cool he should wear it a few weeks later during the group's half-time show at the Super Bowl. I watched the game and the half-time performance. Didn't notice the cap, did you? There's still work to do.

 Mr. Crease, the chairman of the philosophy department at Stony Brook University, writes the "Critical Point" column on the social dimension of science for Physics World magazine. 