Congress should raise the cap on oil companies' liability for offshore spills and improve the U.S. Coast Guard's ability to respond to spills in the Arctic, a presidential panel is set to conclude Tuesday.

The panel's report, which could influence federal policy on offshore drilling, is also expected to recommend that as much as 80% of fines paid by companies for Clean Water Act violations in connection with last spring's Deepwater Horizon accident go toward funding the long-term restoration of the Gulf Coast's ecosystem, according to people familiar with the report.

The report will also call on the oil industry to establish a safety institute that would conduct audits of companies' safety practices and cultures, the people said.

Many of the panel's findings have been telegraphed in white papers issued by its staff members in recent months, or in speeches by its members.

Some findings, such as those on the Arctic, could affect the pace with which the Obama administration approves permits to drill in certain offshore areas. The panel, formally known as the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling, has expressed concern that the Coast Guard lacks vehicles capable of responding to a spill under Arctic conditions.

Other recommendations would require congressional approval, making their enactment uncertain. Legislation to eliminate the current $75 million cap on spill liability passed the House of Representatives last summer, but failed to advance in the Senate.

Since then, U.S. gasoline prices have risen to an average of more than $3 a gallon, unusually high for winter, and Republicans, who are generally more supportive than Democrats of the oil industry and domestic exploration, gained the majority in the House.

The oil industry and its allies in Congress have expressed concern that removing the cap on damage claims would shut out all but the largest oil companies from offshore drilling by making it impossible to obtain insurance. 

A spokesman for the commission, set up by President Barack Obama last spring, declined to comment in advance of a news conference Tuesday, where the panel is expected to release its findings.

Last week, the commission released an excerpt of its report that concluded that the explosion that killed 11 workers on the rig and triggered the biggest offshore oil spill in U.S. history was an avoidable disaster that resulted from management failures by BP PLC and its contractors. 

 Write to  Stephen Power at stephen.power@wsj.com 