 New York 

Nashville-based Abigail Washburn has been spending a lot of time here lately. She's been in the city to visit husband Béla Fleck's mom and attend Steve Martin's New Year's Eve bash, but also to play a showcase for the Association of Performance Arts Presenters and hold the launch party for her new album, "City of Refuge" (Rounder), at the Housing Works Bookstore Café in SoHo. It's as if she's shifted her base, at least temporarily, to indicate her music's new direction.

An engaging, vaguely disquieting blend of old-time country and pop, "City of Refuge" echoes with thoughtfulness, charm and joy, and should introduce Ms. Washburn to an audience beyond her following among traditional country, folk, bluegrass and Americana fans. One would be tempted to call it an unexpected recording, but little that Ms. Washburn does fits anyone's expectations, including her own.

Produced by Tucker Martine, who's worked with the Decemberists and Mudhoney, "City of Refuge" features what's likely a once-in-a-lifetime meeting of musicians: Carl Broemel of My Morning Jacket and Chris Funk of the Decemberists are on guitar and pedal steel; Jeremy Kittel of the Turtle Island Quartet plays violin and viola; Ketch Secor and Morgan Jahnig of Old Crow Medicine Show sing behind Ms. Washburn; Nashville's Kenny Malone is on drums, Viktor Krauss on bass and Kai Welch, who co-wrote five songs with Ms. Washburn, plays a variety of instruments. Other guests of Ms. Washburn's unorthodox approach to music include Wu Fei, who plays a Chinese zither known as a guzheng, and two throat singers from Mongolia. Rayna Gellert, who was Ms. Washburn's colleague in Uncle Earl, an old-time string band that counted among its fans John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin, joins in on fiddle, as does Bill Frisell on guitar.

Listen to clips of songs from "City of Refuge":

The mix works, with Ms. Washburn's voice and plucky "clawhammer"-style banjo holding the center. "Corner Girl," with Mr. Kittel providing chamber accompaniment, sits comfortably next to "Dreams of Nectar," which features the guzheng. An eerie ambiance enriches the texture of the instantly memorable Washburn-Welch compositions "Bring Me My Queen" and "Burn Thru." All the arrangements show just how versatile contemporary American folk music can be when it's played earnestly yet with a sense of adventure.

Ms. Washburn, a chipper 31-year-old, has a résumé unlike anyone else in popular music, one rich with seemingly incongruous facts that she reveals casually in conversation. "I was a lobbyist for three years in Vermont," she said over coffee here. A few minutes later: "I went to an ashram in Massachusetts." Then: "I worked at a consulting firm in Beijing." Her first record label discovered her while she played banjo in a parking garage where she had been sleeping in her truck. She introduced one song from the Housing Works stage by saying it reminded her of when she was teaching English to workers at a Chinese restaurant in Montpelier, Vt.

Born in Evanston, Ill., Ms. Washburn moved frequently as a child while her father pursued his business career. She was drawn to music early, though not to traditional American folk. "I played piano and was always in the choir," she said. "I tried to play flute because all the pretty girls played flute."

While in a tai-chi class in high school, she noticed a poster that encouraged students to visit China to learn the language. She did. Though she was frustrated by her inability to communicate and close the cultural divide, the experience began a lifelong love affair with the country and its people. "I kept remembering the quote of Gandhi: 'Be the change you want to see in the world.'" She continued to study the language at Colorado College and intended to go to law school in Beijing. Though she'd fallen for guitarist Doc Watson's approach to traditional American music, at the time "it wasn't in the realm of possibility for me to be a musician," she said. "I had conceived my life in such a different way."

Since then, Ms. Washburn has recorded five studio albums, including two with Uncle Earl, whose "Waterloo, Tennessee" was produced by Led Zeppelin's Mr. Jones. (Mr. Jones invited Uncle Earl to the 2007 Zeppelin reunion in London and the band sat near the stage during the performance.) In 2008, Abigail Washburn and the Sparrow Quartet, featuring Mr. Fleck, fiddler Casey Driessen and cellist Ben Sollee, released a fascinating self-titled album that explored the links between indigenous American and Chinese folk music. Earlier, the group was the first American ensemble to tour Tibet, she said. During her frequent visits to China, Ms. Washburn played banjo and traditional American music for Chinese audiences. "Instead of singing karaoke, I'd take out my banjo. I had a different goal—to bring China and America together."

"For most Americans, my Chinese music feels like a novelty and it's not what it is for me," Ms. Washburn said. But, she added, the new album is "an experiment in letting go of that Chinese piece and connecting with my American audience.

"I have a general sense of mission and I intuitively know when something is influencing that mission," she said. "I think this is what I'm supposed to be doing. Doors keep opening. In the end it's the best use of my skills. I've finally consented to the idea that I'm an artist."

 Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock.  