By the time the halftime buzzer sounded Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden, the scoreboard had been scrubbed clean, all traces of St. John's early lead over No. 4 Syracuse wiped away.

A sparkling 11-point Orange lead obscured the ugliness of the game's earlier minutes, when Syracuse—which entered the Garden averaging 76 points a game—scraped together two points in the first 6 minutes, 33 seconds and trailed by eight midway through the first half.

"We just got off to a horrendous offensive start," said Syracuse coach Jim Boeheim.

St. John's fans started to believe. But by the time Rick Jackson slammed in a dunk to end the first half, Syracuse's early stumbles had been swept away with polished passing and superior shooting as the Orange (17-0, 4-0) dispatched St. John's, 76-59, in front of a divided Garden crowd of 14,440. Their competing chants ultimately offered the game's fairest matchup.

It was the second straight loss for St. John's (10-5, 3-2 in the Big East), the second straight game where shoddy shooting and turnovers torpedoed the team's chances.

"I thought early we did some good things," said St. John's coach Steve Lavin. "But somewhere about the eighth-minute marker of the first half through the second half [Syracuse] thoroughly dominated the game at both ends of the floor." 

This game continued a critical stretch for the Red Storm. Syracuse was the third of eight straight ranked opponents St. John's will face.

After toppling then-No. 13 Georgetown earlier this month, the Red Storm stirred hopes that its stated vow of reaching postseason play this season might be within reach. But after consecutive losses to Notre Dame and Syracuse, St. John's is now 1-2 in those contests—with the Irish arriving at Madison Square Garden Sunday afternoon for a rematch. 

St. John's faced a Syracuse squad that is off to the second- best start in program history. The Red Storm was coming off one of its worst losses this year against Notre Dame, when they shot 38.2% from the field. Against Syracuse, St. John's was even worse, shooting 36.8%, including 2 for 12 from 3-point range and 0 for 6 on 3-pointers in the second half.

Syracuse seized a 19-17 lead on an emphatic dunk by Brandon Triche with just over six minutes left in the first half, and would not relinquish their advantage again, spinning their lead out past 20 points in the second half.

"We did some things in stretches and spurts, particularly in the first half, that was impressive," Mr. Lavin said. "But you have to sustain it if you're going to have a chance to beat a top four team like Syracuse."