HONG KONG—The government here said it is "striving" to pass legislation allowing it to comply with United Nations sanctions against Iran.

Last week, the U.S. Treasury Department blacklisted 24 shipping companies—20 of them based in Hong Kong—it said were fronts for the Iranian state shipping line, known as IRISL, which it accuses of violating a U.N. weapons embargo.

But without changes in its law—which would have to go through Beijing before taking effect—Hong Kong can't seize the assets of the shipping companies the U.S. says are skirting international sanctions targeting Iran's nuclear program.

Sixteen of the companies are based in the same address in Hong Kong. Small businesses and entrepreneurs frequently incorporate in Hong Kong, using agencies that provide little more than an address, phone and a fax line for a fee. The state department alleges that Iran's shipping company transferred the ownership of some ships to Hong Kong shell companies.

Hong Kong, a former British colony that is now a part of China with a different legal system, generally gets high marks for cooperation with international law enforcement agencies. But the ease with which companies can be established in Hong Kong have allowed some to evade legal scrutiny.

Hong Kong has yet to pass legislation to enforce the latest U.N. embargo against Iran's nuclear program, even though Beijing reluctantly supported the tougher measures passed in June. The sanctions require laws separate from other regulations such as anticorruption or money-laundering rules already on the books.

"We are striving to complete the work as soon as possible," a spokeswoman from the Hong Kong office of Commerce and Economic Development said in a statement. "Our Enforcement agencies will take appropriate actions on those found in violation of the laws."

The U.S. accuses the companies of being affiliated with IRISL, through which Iran has been transporting the equipment and material to develop its nuclear program. Iran says it is developing civilian nuclear power, but the U.N. says Iran's goal is to build nuclear weapons.

But Hong Kong can't pass the legislation until Beijing approves it. "In matters of external affairs, Hong Kong is entirely dependent on instructions from Beijing,"  Steve Vickers, chairman of security consultancy FTI-International Risk, said. "Therefore, the level of urgency associated with such laws would be driven by Beijing."

The U.S. and others have been trying to cut off Iran's overseas money and supply lines, forcing Iran to try to obscure its paper trail.

"IRISL is under tremendous financial pressure from international sanctions, and it is going to extreme lengths to obscure its network and the ownership of vessels," said Stuart Levey, U.S. under secretary for terrorism and financial intelligence, in a statement.

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com 