DETROIT--U.S. Treasury Secretary  Timothy Geithner said the nation's budget deficits are too high and must be reduced.

Mr. Geithner also said the U.S. will lose money on its $80 billion bailout of the U.S. auto industry, but that the jobs saved as a result of the rescue justify the expense. He stressed that the Obama administration is eager to exit its stake in  General Motors Co.
GM


-1.32
%




 and Chrysler LLC. 

Mr. Geithner's prepared remarks to the Detroit Economic Club Thursday came as the U.S. heads toward what might be a record budget shortfall this year. 

The Obama administration has projected the country will run a $1.65 trillion deficit in 2011. That would be the biggest in U.S. history. The 2010 deficit was $1.29 trillion.

"Our deficits are too high," Mr. Geithner said. "They will not be solved by future economic growth, and left unaddressed they will hurt future economic growth."

This week, the government reported the economy grew at a 1.8% annual rate in the first three months, down from a 3.1% pace in the fourth quarter. Consumer spending slowed as people are being forced to pay more for gasoline and food.

But economists, including Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, expect the recovery to gain momentum later this year.

In his remarks, Mr. Geithner said tax relief is helping Americans deal with higher gas prices.

"Even with the many challenges we face, the economy is healing and getting stronger," Mr. Geithner said.

He said the U.S. has to bring down deficits to a level that will put its debt burden on a declining path as a share of the economy. Spending cuts and tax reform must be phased in over time to avoid hurting the economic expansion, he added.

Mr. Geithner said a bipartisan consensus must be built. "We have a chance to do that now because there is broad agreement among both Republicans and Democrats on the scale of the deficit reduction you need to commit to and achieve," he said.

Speaking about the auto-industry rescue, Mr. Geithner said it "makes no sense to be [involved with GM and Chrysler] a day longer than it's possible" to exit.

Chrysler said Thursday it is poised to repay the $7.5 billion in loans it received from the U.S. and Canadian governments. Meantime, the U.S. is eyeing a share sale this summer to further reduce its stake in GM. The U.S. owns 26.5% of GM after an IPO last fall reduced its stake from 61%.

At the current share price, the U.S. would lose around $10 billion on the GM rescue.

"We didn't do these to maximize returns," Mr. Geithner said. "We did it to save jobs."

 Write to  Jeff Bater at jeff.bater@dowjones.com and Sharon Terlep at sharon.terlep@wsj.com 