When my colleague Dorothy Rabinowitz wrote about the then-new "Parks and Recreation" in 2009, she saw the promise in this gentle comedy, which revolves around a group of eccentric workers in the small-town bureaucracy of Pawnee, Ind. The show's original promise has been fulfilled many times over. In the third season, begun this month, it's good to report that "Parks" still feels as fresh as a newborn.

That makes things easy on any latecomers to the show. It might help to know that "Parks and Recreation" is styled as a mockumentary, where characters occasionally speak to the camera. Otherwise, the sentiments it ultimately evokes—kindness, fairness and the pursuit of happiness even in the face of frustration—are pretty close to the ones in those Foundation for a Better Life ads. Better yet, "Parks" exudes charm without the self-awareness or coy preachiness of "Glee." It consistently pokes fun at our culture and foibles in ways that are clever and sometimes sharp but never mean.

As this season began, the local budget was reinstated, but on such a measly level that the Parks Department's leading light, Leslie (Amy Poehler), decided to spread local cheer by reviving the town's Harvest Festival. True to Pawnee form, the thrilling highlights of the festival (which begins with the March 3 episode) will include guest appearances by Larry Byrd's 84-year-old aunt and a 25-year-old miniature horse. 

 Parks and Recreation  Thursdays, 9:30-10 p.m. EST  NBC 

There will also be problems with the local Wamapoke Indians, who are threatening consequences because the festival is taking place on what they regard as sacred ground. Will the tribe call on the spirits of their ancestors to jinx the festival? "There are two things I know about white people," a tribal representative tells the camera. "They love [the band] Matchbox Twenty, and they are terrified of curses."

In the meantime, the town's attention is on a time capsule that Leslie proposes to compile and bury so that citizens of Pawnee can leave a record of their time on earth for future generations. Such a simple idea, and yet it gets all balled up in ways that invite snickers at local pettiness until we are reminded again that when "Parks" appears to be sending up the good, quaint folk of Pawnee, it is really pointing a finger of fun at all of us. 

The trouble begins when a local man chains himself to a chair in Leslie's office because she refuses to put a copy of the vampire-love novel "Twilight" into the time capsule. Soon Leslie's officemates are coming out of the "Twilight" closet, or being converted on the spot, for earnest discussions of the book's intricate plot. At a town meeting, though, discussion of what to put in the capsule soon features heated political argument. As suggestions for appropriate relics proliferate—a copy of the Bill of Rights, the ashes of dead relatives and pets—the efforts to please everyone, all the time, grow increasingly ridiculous. Sound familiar?

Quirky townspeople aside, the workers in City Hall have their own foibles. There's the libertarian Ron (Nick Offerman), a man's man who is addicted to meat but who also gives strangely smart advice to the romantically inclined: "Women like scars. [It] shows you survived an attack." Then there is the hustling entrepreneur Tom (Aziz Ansari), looking to pitch a new body spray to the inventor of Blackout, "an ether-based perfume…and one of Maxim's Top 100 Ways to Trick Someone into Sex." Chris (Rob Lowe, playing against past type) is a visiting bean counter with such a sunny disposition that a woman can't tell when he breaks up with her. 

Week after week, "Parks" draws a bead on our national obsessions and lets us laugh at them the way we probably should: the fads for microbrewing, interventions and so-vile-they're-hip band names (e.g., Mouse Rat); the proliferation of crass and idiotic morning drive-time shows and the ways the media creates circuses of crises so it can report on them. Even better, it's all done without pratfalls, sleaze or a laugh track. The humor spans decades, from jokes about Angela Lansbury's hair to current lingo: "It's been really awesome looking at you," one man at the festival hospital tent tells his caregiver. "Most carnival nurses are total grenades."

After the striving Leslie, the other heart and soul of the show right now is visiting bureaucrat Ben (Adam Scott), whose sensibilities sub for our own most of the time. With any luck, and although neither of them knows it, he may be Leslie's intended. Sure, Leslie may be distracted for the moment, with plans for visiting Indiana's second-largest rocking chair, or the museum where Madame Tussauds sends its failed celebrity wax figures. But she, like almost everybody else here, is looking for true love. 

That's the way it goes in "Parks" and in Pawnee, a town where everybody knows your name. And a town, like the show itself, without guile.