There are loads of reasons why Tefaf, the world's leading fine-art and antiques fair, draws crowds of dedicated fans each year to Maastricht in the Netherlands. They include an enormous range of museum-quality items at the around 260 international galleries; the uplifting mood of the fair, with its colorful spring flowers and the sheer magnetism of many of the objects; or just the desire to be where the action is.

Dutch businessman Gerrit Lodder has attended the fair (currently on until March 27) since it began in the 1970s. "Each year I look forward to Tefaf and I regularly buy here," says Mr. Lodder, who collects 16th- to 19th-century paintings. "Perhaps there are too many people here these days who just want to be seen." Seated outside a stand filled with Old Masters, Mr. Lodder is taking the weight off his feet, while eyeing the offerings. It's the preopening preview and Mr. Lodder is taking his time. "I don't feel obliged to buy on the first day," he says. "Maybe I'll miss out, but that's okay. Rushing in is not a good idea." Mr. Lodder also collects Japanese prints. He is the founder of Lodder Bonsai BV in Harmelen, which specializes in Bonsai trees, and has been awarded the Japanese Order of the Rising Sun, Gold and Silver Rays for his work promoting the miniature trees internationally.

Hotel-management student Paul Ruitenbeek has come to Tefaf for four years now. "I'm fascinated with Asian art," he says, as he studies rows of ancient objects with the sharp eye of an aspiring collector. He was doing the rounds at Ben Janssens Oriental Art of London, which on the first day sold a mother-of-pearl inlaid lacquer box from the Japanese Ryukyu Islands for more than $100,000. Tefaf is also a must on Anouk Jaspers' schedule. Ms. Jaspers, of the innovative Gort jewelry shop in Amsterdam, says she comes for inspiration: "The Russian jewelry this year is fabulous."

So what objects did I find particularly striking on my two-day visit to the fair? Unforgettable for me is "Flag for a New World Power" (2004) by Ghana artist El Anatsui. The dramatic red-and-gold curtain of aluminum and copper wire made from rum-bottle packaging graces the entrance to the Axel Vervoordt stand (price: around €680,000). If only I had the money and a house big enough for a 500-centimeter-by-550-centimeter piece. Apparently, others have the same space constraints. "We have a young collector who usually buys ancient art who is desperate to have it. But his home is just not big enough," gallery director Robert Lauwers says.

"Oiseau Lunaire" (1945) by Joan Miró, a surrealist olive-wood sculpture called moon bird, captures the eye. This work, from Landau Fine Art of Canada, was sold at the preview for an asking price of $5 million. Surrealism used to be the province of a small niche of European collectors, but demand in this field has grown enormously over recent years, as shown in international auctions. 

In a hard-to-find corner, Gregg Baker Asian Art has two stunning Japanese screens. One is a rare, 19th-century, eight-fold paper screen with life-like storks proudly parading across the facade (around €200,000); the other, a 17th-century, glowing, six-fold screen with a golden background and flying birds (around €60,000). "Japan has been in the shadow of China and India. I am hoping for more focus on the richness of Japan's culture," says Mr. Baker. Across the aisle is Nomos, a Swiss dealer in ancient and medieval coins and medals. These miniature artworks illustrate the history of mankind and have an impact that belies their size. 

Munich jeweler Hemmerlecauses visitors to smile, with its new series of jewels based on vegetables. On display are precious objects backed by their real counterparts: An onion made of silver, copper and diamonds (price: €41,000) rests on a natural onion; a diamond and gold cauliflower (€156,000) on a real cauliflower. There are also diamond radishes, corn and peas at various prices. 

 Write to  Margaret Studer at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 