The shift in French President Nicolas Sarkozy's diplomatic efforts in Libya highlights how France is trying to regain its past influence in the Arab world.

The United Nations Security Council's decision to authorize the use of force against Col. Moammar Gadhafi also gives Mr. Sarkozy the chance to burnish his credentials on the world stage ahead of next year's presidential elections in France.

For U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron, who led the campaign for military intervention against Libya together with Mr. Sarkozy, the UN resolution is a clear victory for a young leader who is dealing with his first major international crisis.

Still, if any strikes against the North African country were to become a long military campaign, both men would likely suffer politically.

The French, who praised Mr. Sarkozy's predecessor Jacques Chirac when he declined to participate in the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003, are mostly opposed to military intervention in Libya, says a recent opinion poll. In the U.K., any sign of British military getting bogged down in a long and costly engagement could see the public turn on Mr. Cameron, in the way many turned on former Prime Minister Tony Blair as the Iraq war became more deadly and costly.

For now, however, Messrs. Sarkozy and Cameron are reaping the benefits of their pro-war campaign.

France's opposition Socialist Party, which rarely has any words of praise for Mr. Sarkozy, lauded his Libyan stance. 

"If the international community had not reacted, it would have meant a free hand for all dictators," French Socialist Jean-Marc Ayrault told reporters, after a meeting during which members of Mr. Sarkozy's government briefed lawmakers on its Libyan plans.

Latset developments

Mr. Sarkozy's boldest move in the international stand-off came last week when—even to the surprise of French diplomats—he recognized Libya's opposition movement as the country's only true representative. That decision marked a sharp change in France's diplomacy in the Arab world, a region where Paris has traditionally supported stability more than change.

The move also helped France draw a line under a string of embarrassments that had muddied its diplomatic efforts since the start of uprisings in Tunisia, Egypt and other Arab nations, analysts say.

In January, French Foreign Minister Michèle Alliot-Marie acknowledged she had spent her Christmas holiday in Tunisia—where a popular revolt had started two weeks earlier—and used a private jet owned by a relative of then-Tunisia President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. 

Ms. Alliot-Marie has since resigned from the government, but the event gave the French public the impression that France was cozying up to despotic rulers in the Middle East, instead of backing democratic forces.

France has "failed to seize the sense of despair and the suffering of Tunisia's population," Mr. Sarkozy acknowledged in late January.

Track events day by day.

"I think [France] learned its lesson in Tunisia, so here in Libya they allied with the people early," said Iman Bugaighis, a spokeswoman for Libya's rebel government in Benghazi.

Mr. Cameron's biggest problem though is that the UK media and public will likely soon focus on the fact he is offering the services of a military whose budget last October he said he would cut 7.5% to help reduce record British debt. The cuts will hit aircraft, ships and artillery, and will leave the UK with no aircraft carrier capability in the coming decade.

"Watching David Cameron make the first and most aggressive noises about no-fly zone over Libya was interesting given he has enacted a review that sees the UK with no aircraft carrier for ten years," said Eric Edelman, who was an undersecretary of defense for policy under George W. Bush.

Some military officers have already expressed reservations to the UK government that committing assets in Libya, alongside those in Afghanistan, will take away the U.K.'s ability to react if other countries need military interventions, including those that have greater strategic interest for the UK such as Iran and Bahrain, people familiar with the matter say.

—Charles Levinson contributed to this article.

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com and Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 