 S&P cut Greece's credit rating, pushing down the euro and the bonds of other indebted countries on Europe's periphery. The euro touched a three-week low against the dollar Monday in New York, and the European currency also fell against the yen.  

 The European Union will take steps to eliminate trade concessions for wealthy emerging economies, part of a shift in global trade terms as the EU and U.S. adapt to the rise of Russia, Brazil and other new export powers.  

 Miner Resourcehouse is expected to cut the size of its planned $3 billion IPO in Hong Kong, even as MGM Resorts' Macau joint venture seeks a larger-than-anticipated range of $1 billion to $1.5 billion.  

 IntercontinentalExchange and Nasdaq OMX Group told shareholders of NYSE Euronext to demand more time to review the proposed merger with Deutsche Börse, warning that the Big Board had "rushed to judgment" on the deal.  

 Toshiba's earnings doubled in the latest quarter amid lower restructuring costs, helping the Japanese company post its first full-year profit in three years.  

 Softbank's net profit surged in the latest quarter, as the Japanese company benefited from demand for Apple's iPhone.  

 SingTel board member Simon Israel will succeed Chumpol NaLamlieng as the telecommunications company's chairman after its annual general meeting in July.  

 As AIG executives begin promoting a stock sale that will help end U.S. ownership in the insurer, the government looks unlikely to reap large gains and may not profit from its offering of AIG shares.  

 The world's largest economies are set to grow at different speeds, with the U.S., Germany and Russia performing strongly, while Italy, Brazil and India will experience relatively slower growth, according to the OECD.  

 Hertz offered to acquire Dollar Thrifty for $2.08 billion in cash and stock, aiming to thwart rival Avis's attempt to buy the car-rental company.  

 More than 1,000 Qantas engineers plan to hold a one-hour strike Friday at airports across Australia.  

 U.S. stocks rose as commodity prices recovered. Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index snapped an eight-session losing streak.  

 Chubu Electric Power gave in to Japanese government pressure and agreed to temporarily shut the nuclear reactors at its Hamaoka plant, a move that worsens the nation's looming electricity shortage.  

A ship sank off the coast of Libya with as many as 600 migrants aboard who were trying to flee the North African country.

 The Thai government set national elections for July 3 after securing royal approval to dissolve Parliament on Tuesday.  

China banned outspoken writer and government critic Liao Yiwu from leaving the country to attend a literary festival in Australia, and warned him not to publish any of his controversial works overseas.

India's Supreme Court suspended a lower court ruling that divided a bitterly contested religious site between Hindus and Muslims in the town of Ayodhya.

 An Australian town's struggle to rebuild after four months of devastating weather and floods is emblematic of the impact on the Queensland region and the nation's economy.  

Samoa plans to jump forward in time by one day by shifting west of the international dateline in a bid to boost the South Pacific island nation's trade and economy.