Last week, manager Joe Girardi gave the reporters assembled in his office a homework assignment. 

The topic was Brett Gardner and the worth of the stolen base, which had fallen out of favor in much of the past decade as the walk and the home run rose in prominence.

"Just running into outs doesn't make sense,'' Girardi said. "But when you've got a guy who's as consistent as Gardy with stealing bases?" 

Then he laid out his assignment, using Gardner's stolen base totals from 2010 and the hitter's on-base plus slugging percentage (OPS) to prove his point. 

"Everyone talks about OPS—if you want to, add [that] every single's a double, in a sense, and then for the ones where he gets thrown out, take away the single, and tell me which OPS is higher," Girardi said. 

Challenge accepted. 

Gardner hit .277 last season, with an excellent .383 on-base percentage but a weak .379 slugging percentage, for a .762 OPS. The major league average was .728.

But that doesn't account for his speed. Gardner stole 47 bases in 56 attempts, an excellent 83% success rate. Do what Girardi's suggesting—make every single followed by a stolen base into a double, and erase the singles when Gardner was caught—and his numbers improve dramatically. His on-base percentage drops to .369, but his slugging percentage rises dramatically, giving him an .827 OPS. On the 2010 Yankees, only stars Alex Rodriguez, Mark Teixeira, Robinson Cano, and Nick Swisher in his career year were higher. 

To Girardi, that's proof that the steal is a dangerous weapon when used correctly—one with ancillary benefits when a troublemaking player like Gardner is wreaking havoc on the basepaths. 

"The problems that [Gardner] causes for other teams—it's pressure, and a lot of times pressure leads to mistakes," Girardi said. 

The Yankees may be known as the Bronx Bombers, but the Girardi Yankees have never shied away from the stolen base.

In Girardi's three years at the helm, the Yankees have ranked in the top 12 in the majors in stolen bases, with a success rate of 77.38% compared to the MLB average of 72.58% over that same period.

"You always want to focus on being around or above 80%," Gardner said, which was the mantra drilled into him as a Yankee farmhand. 

Once one of baseball's most celebrated plays, sabermetric analysis has shown that the stolen base—while exciting—can damage a team if not used correctly. A base stealer must be successful more than 75% of the time or else he is costing his team runs when he tries to steal. 

Over the past 30 years, as that thinking has permeated baseball, the number of stolen bases has dropped, but the success rate has climbed. Teams don't simply let fast players run into outs. They demand success. 

In addition, as Gardner noted, teams put more emphasis on holding on runners now, cutting down opportunities to steal. 

"Pitchers are doing a better job of holding runners on, so I think guys are, for the most part, being more picky about when they run," Gardner said. 

In 2010, players stole bases at a 72% clip—one of the best rates in the past three decades. They attempted 4,088 steals, which is up from the home run peak of the mid-2000s, but far fewer than the 1980s, when total steal attempts were normally upward of 4,500 per season. The success rates in the 1980s, however, hovered around 68%. 

The best modern teams seem to have realized that a successful base stealer is a genuine weapon—and a poor one is to be reined in. 

The American League East has three of baseball's most effective base stealers in Gardner, Jacoby Ellsbury and Carl Crawford, who all stole at a rate better than 80% in their last full seasons. Now that Crawford and Ellsbury are together on the Red Sox, manager Terry Francona will adjust his strategy to fit his players. 

With Ellsbury out last season, the Red Sox almost never tried to steal—they ranked 25th in baseball in steals. Now that they have two players who have high success rates, they figure to attack regularly. 

"I think it depends on who you have,'' Francona said. "Any manager, he'd say, 'Yeah, we'd love to be aggressive.' That's good, but the idea is to score more runs and, OK, how do you best do that? If you have guys who run and they run successfully, then we let them run."

The Yankees figure to let their players run again, as well. Like Gardner, Curtis Granderson and Derek Jeter are also high-percentage stealers. Even if Gardner is moved up to leadoff, Girardi has such faith in his base stealer that he will not curtail Gardner's aggressiveness. 

"I want him to get a bag anytime he can get a bag," Girardi said. 

Chances are, he will. 

A look at MLB's stolen base statistics since 1980.

  

Source