Bill collectors in New Mexico will be soon required to inform borrowers they can't be taken to court for long-overdue debts, changing the landscape for consumers and creditors in the state. 

A handful of states and cities have addressed the issue, which has gained attention from the Federal Trade Commission as debt-collector complaints have risen. 

Since April 2010, New York City has required debt collectors to notify consumers in writing if the debt has passed the statute of limitations, known as "time barred." 

Wisconsin and Mississippi have laws that not only eliminate the right to sue on time-barred debts but extinguish the debt entirely. 

Statutes vary by state but nearly all have a time limit for credit-card debt.

In New Mexico, Attorney General Gary King adopted a rule in December requiring debt collectors to inform borrowers if the loan they are inquiring about has passed the statute of limitations—four years for most credit-card debt in that state. By law, lenders can't go to court to collect on such loans.

The rule, which goes into effect in March, is designed to protect consumers, but collection agencies say that it will lead consumers to believe they will escape penalties entirely for not paying their debts. 

Instead, the debt can linger on a credit report, generally for seven years. 

Complicating the decision for debtors is that even a partial payment on old debt can restart the clock on the obligation and render it no longer "time barred"—a disclosure that the new rule requires debt collectors to make. The risk of unknowingly reaffirming a debt was part of the impetus behind New York's rule.

"One of the abuses in the debt-collection industry was debt collectors who would misrepresent to people what the risks were about very old debt," said Jonathan Mintz, commissioner of the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs. "People can make old debts fresh again by making partial payments."

The Federal Trade Commission has urged states to take a harder line on collecting old debts.

 "Consumers are not aware that collectors cannot lawfully sue to recover on time-barred debt," the FTC said in July. 

"To prevent deception, collectors who seek to collect debt they know or should know is time barred should disclose that they cannot lawfully sue the consumers." 

Federal Trade Commissioner Julie Brill, in a speech in July, said, "I believe that it is time for Congress to amend federal law to prohibit such collection efforts." She warned of more FTC enforcement efforts in this area. 

Debt-collection agencies say the new rules create unfair burdens on their industry and aren't as helpful to borrowers as they appear. 

The disclaimer could create a false sense of comfort for consumers, David Cherner, legislative director of state government affairs for the Association of Credit and Collection Professionals, said of the New Mexico rule. 

"We've indirectly put them in a position to believe the debt is not going to impact their life," Mr. Cherner said.

  Nathalie Martin, a University of New Mexico law professor, says that many people in the state "can't afford to pay all the debts that they owe, so they're going to have to prioritize." 

The new rules may make it tougher to convince debtors to pay their loans. 

A survey by Ms. Martin and colleague  Timothy Goldsmith presented nearly 150 respondents with a hypothetical debt, and found 34% said they wouldn't agree to a payment plan when informed the debt couldn't be enforced in court. Of those who weren't told the debt wasn't legally enforceable, just 6% said they would decline to pay. 

New Mexico's rule stems from a lawsuit against Merchants' Credit Guide Co., a debt-collection company, for violating state law by failing to notify consumers that it was trying to collect debts that had passed the statute of limitations even though that information would be important, or material, to the consumer.

The case was settled, but "we wanted an industrywide fix," said William Keller, assistant attorney general. 

"Some of these complaints that we got, the obligation was something like 17 years old," Mr. Keller said.

 Write to  Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 