Global stocks and oil prices leapt to fresh multi-year highs as investors welcomed the New Year with hope for a strengthening global recovery. 

Fueling the gains were reports that factory activity ratcheted up world-wide, with the U.S., Europe's major economies, Brazil and South Korea posting their best numbers in more than six months.

Stocks in those markets all surged, while commodities raced higher on the accelerating global economic recovery. Copper reached a fresh all-time high, while oil surged to as much as $92.58 a barrel in intra-day trading, its highest point since October 2008. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 93.24 points, or 0.8%, to finish at 11670.75, a 28-month high. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rose 14.23 points, or 1.1%, to end at 1271.87.

"Hope springs eternal," says Robert Pavlik, chief market strategist at investment advisers Banyan Partners in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla. "You have an improving economy—manufacturing is good, jobs are good and we have a White House and a Congress that look like they're willing to work together."

Financial and technology stocks powered most of the gains, with  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


0.65
%




 leading the Dow components with a 6.4% advance after the banking giant said it would buy back mortgages from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Other banks also rallied, with  Citigroup Inc.,
C


0.67
%




 Goldman Sachs
GS


0.97
%




 Group and  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.99
%




 each rising 2.9% or more.

The technology-focused Nasdaq Composite outpaced the broader market to gain 38.65 points, or 1.5%, to finish at 2691.52, a three-year high. South Korea's main stock index, a closely watched bellwether heavy on exporters and technology companies, gained 0.9% to break its previous record-high finish, set in October 2007. In early trading Tuesday, Korea's market was up another 0.2%. Japan's Nikkei Stock Average rose 1.2%.

The global stock market increases were triggered by a rise in factory activity in December. A closely watched index of euro-zone manufacturing activity showed improvement across the continent, with Ireland posting its third straight monthly increase and Germany and Italy posting impressive gains. The German and French stock markets shot up 1.1% and 2.5% respectively, while the broader Stoxx Europe 600 gained 0.8%.

In Asia's export-led economies, manufacturing activity remained strong, with South Korea's index accelerating to the fastest level in seven months, though the pace of growth slowed in China and India. But even China's manufacturing activity falling to a three-month low seemed to cheer investors, who saw signs that Beijing's tightening measures were working, lowering prospects for further inflation-targeting policies from central authorities. Shanghai's market was closed, but Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index rose 1.7% to its highest close in a month. India's Sensitive Index also rose to a seven-week high.

In the U.S., the Institute for Supply Management's index of manufacturing activity improved modestly in December, marking the 17th consecutive month of expansion in the sector. Construction spending also increased, helping sentiment. Investors will now be looking ahead for more confirmation of an improving economy when they see a trio of reports on the employment sector, including private-sector payrolls on Wednesday, weekly jobless claims on Thursday and Friday's official monthly payrolls report.

The improved economic picture pushed up commodity prices. In addition to the record highs in copper, silver reached a new 30-year high, while wheat prices surged 1.4% to a 28-month high after Australia, a major wheat exporter, found its harvest under threat of flooding.

Purchasing managers' indexes of manufacturing activity

Oil prices, which rose to an intra-day high of $92.58 before settling up 0.2% at a more modest $91.55, also benefited from hopes that manufacturing activity was picking up, with investors beginning to fret about the impact that oil at $95 or even $100 a barrel could have on the economic recovery.

"As we get closer to $100 and gasoline prices at the pump get to $3.50 or more, it starts to weigh on the psyche of the investor and maybe pulls on confidence," Mr. Pavlik said.

Monday's gyrations marked the biggest one-day move for the Dow in a month. During December, the stock market crept up, gaining 5.2% but posting only two days of triple-digit point gains on the Dow and recording some of the lowest trading volumes of the year. Trading volumes on Monday were the highest they've been in two weeks. At its peak, the Dow came within 11 points of another milestone in its five-month march upward—its tech-bubble high of 11722, set January 14, 2000.

Optimism about the economy led investors to sell Treasurys, sending the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note up to 3.34%. The dollar gained against most of its major rivals.

Bank of America led the Dow components, gaining 6.6% after the Charlotte, N.C.-based lender said it would buy back $2.8 billion worth of soured mortgages from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and would take a provision of about $3 billion in the fourth quarter to cover bad loans sold to the agencies. While a costly settlement, investors saw the move as an attempt by the largest U.S. bank by assets to move past the issue of sloppy underwriting at Countrywide Financial, the giant mortgage originator Bank of America bought in 2008. Bank of America was one of the worst performers last year, falling 11%.

Other banking stocks gained in sympathy, as investors with fresh funds at the beginning of the year looked to sectors that were little-loved in 2010. "Part of what you tend to see in January is that the laggards become the leaders," says Douglas Cliggott, U.S. equity strategist and a managing director at Credit Suisse Group, pointing to gains among financial, health-care and larger technology companies. "If you're looking for fresh opportunities in the market, near the bottom of the performance tables in 2010 are the obvious place to look."

Technology stocks benefited from enthusiasm over the Goldman Sachs-led $500 million investment in privately held Facebook, a deal whose rich implied valuation helped buoy sentiment in that sector, according to Matthew Lloyd, chief investment strategist at Advisors Asset Management. He added that the sector is one of the best-positioned, as companies turn to technology spending to improve efficiencies.

The day's gains continued a trend that has seen outsized gains on the first trading days of recent months. They also marked the third consecutive year with a sharp increase on the first day of the trading year. On Jan. 4, 2010, the Dow shot up 156 points.

 Write to  Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com and Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 