MADRID—The Spanish banking sector was downgraded by Moody's Investors Service Inc., heaping further pressure on Iberian banks following the collapse of Portugal's minority government overnight. 

However, market observers said big names like Banco Santander and  Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria SA
BBVA


-0.77
%




 may prove resilient to the latest news as Spanish markets are showing some signs of decoupling from Portugal's political and economic crisis. 

"There's more confidence around Spain," said  Silvia Verde, a banking analyst with Inverseguros, a local brokerage. "The market mood is better than it was a few months ago." 

Moody's said its downgrade comes after a similar move on Spain's sovereign debt earlier this month. It said the move reflects heightened financial pressure on Spain's sovereign credit and that of "many" weak banks, and a decline of the systemic importance of smaller banks amid quick consolidation in the sector. It also reflects the expectation of a weaker support environment for banks across Europe. 

Moody's left unchanged the ratings of Santander, BBVA and La Caixa, listed as  Criteria CaixCorp.—Spain's three biggest banks by market share—and downgraded by one or more notches the deposit and senior credit ratings of 30 smaller banks, most of them unlisted saving banks or "cajas" now in the process of consolidating into bigger entities. 

Iberian traders said the effect of the Moody's move, which includes downgrades of 15 banks by two notches and five banks by three or four notches, should be limited as it was already widely anticipated. 

"In my opinion, the market has already priced in some [most] of this re-rating. What is interesting is that the big three remain untouched, this should prompt some shift to the quality names," a Madrid-based trader said. 

Traders said BBVA is weaker after some recent outperformance, as the Moody's downgrade coincides Thursday with a downgrade by Japan's Nomura, to reduce from neutral—an added sign of growing risks to a sector hampered by real-estate debt, now widely seen as a weak link in Spain's economy. 

  Alberto Postigo, a Moody's Senior Analyst, said that as much as 60% of anticipated losses in Spanish banks are tied to the country's real-estate bust. Moody's is forecasting Spanish housing prices to drop 30% from their 2007 peak, and most estimates indicate prices have only dropped between 10% and 20% so far. 

The crisis in Portugal, which is widely seen on the brink of requesting a European Union bailout, may also have a limited effect on Spanish banks. According to estimates from the Bank of International Settlements, Spanish banks are the most exposed to possible losses in Portugal, as they account for $109 billion out of $322 billion in total exposure of foreign banks in the country. 

Late Wednesday, Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates said he will step down after Parliament rejected a key set of austerity measures, paving the way for the country to request a bailout that may be between €50 billion ($71 billion) and €100 billion. 

—Javier Espinoza and Alex MacDonald in London contributed to this article. 