TOKYO—Japan's government announced Friday a comprehensive plan to rescue  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 and fund compensation claims stemming from the country's worst-ever nuclear energy disaster that are expected to total more than $30 billion. 

The approval by the cabinet of Prime Minister Naoto Kan came after last-minute disputes within the ruling party over how heavily the company should be penalized and who in the end would pay the massive costs.

"The government, as it recognizes its social responsibility in having so far promoted nuclear power policy in coordination with nuclear power operators, is going to support Tokyo Electric Power … while aiming to minimize the burden on the people," the government said in announcing the plan.

Tepco and the government haven't released any estimates, but Bank of America Merrill Lynch has said the total amount could be from ¥2.5 trillion to ¥4 trillion ($31 billion to $49 billion).

Under the program, the government will create a state-backed institution that will keep the utility solvent and has the right to borrow government funds that it will then loan to Tepco. 

Company President Masataka  Shimizu
1803


0.19
%




 has said that the crisis has created severe problems in trying to raise funds in the financial markets.

However the aid comes with strings attached, and political opposition means that the necessary parliamentary approval is not certain. 

Some lawmakers said there should be stronger measures to ensure that the public does not foot the cost while others say the government should bear more of a direct responsibility since a failure in regulation was partly responsible.

One of the government's conditions for aid—accepted by the company—is that Tepco set no prior ceiling on the total amount of compensation. 

Tepco also has agreed to seek cooperation from all of its stakeholders, which government officials said could mean that investors would be asked to accept losses. 

The government will also have a hand in managing the utility through a special commission to make sure it sticks to promises to sell assets and undertake restructuring. 

Tepco formally submitted its request for government aid Tuesday, saying it was having funding problems that could hinder its plan to compensate people affected by the disaster at its Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant following the country's massive earthquake and tsunami. 

Tepco has said it would undertake its own large-scale restructuring, which is expected to include a sale of nonessential assets, such as real estate and securities holdings.