"There's always an element of serendipity when something works," the director and screenwriter  Paul Schrader said recently. Mr. Schrader was speaking about "Taxi Driver," the 1976 film he wrote and  Martin Scorsese directed with  Robert De Niro in the title role. Thirty-five years after their collaboration had its debut, claimed the Palme d'Or at Cannes, redefined New York City on the screen and began working its way deep into the American cultural psyche, "Taxi Driver" has been digitally restored by  Sony Pictures. A new print of "Taxi Driver" will begin showing for two weeks at Film Forum on Friday in advance of a blu-ray release later this year. 

"I wrote the script in six days," Mr. Schrader said of the film's gestation. Creating "Taxi Driver," he explained, was as much therapy as expression: "I was in a particular rough patch and I felt this character becoming me. I was afraid of him. I wrote it so that I could get rid of him—get him outside of me and look at him and exorcise myself of him." 

When the result went before the cameras in July of 1975, Mr. Schrader said his personal connection to  Travis Bickle and the blurred moral landscape of mid-'70s New York City were echoed and reinforced by Mr. Scorsese and by Mr. De Niro. "It plugged into our lives at just the right time." Mr. Schrader said. "I think Bob and Marty and I all knew this guy." 

Cinematographer Michael Chapman credits a mutual familiarity with New York itself for the film's hallucinatory, detailed vision of the city. "All of us who were deeply involved in making [the film] lived in New York," Mr. Chapman said. "All of us had strong feelings and a view of New York."

Mr. Chapman allowed that the film's modest budget forced creatively auspicious practical compromises during principal photography. "It's something that happens over and over again," he said. "The physical situation and the technology determines the aesthetics. We were a low-budget movie so we couldn't do a lot of the things people would do in those days." Rather than secure Travis Bickle's Checker cab on a trailer and use costly lighting rigs to illuminate passing building fronts, Mr. Chapman said he and the production team "let the city light itself. Because of that it looks, I think, as ominous and realistic as it does. We didn't have the time or the money to do anything else." 

When the Motion Picture Association of America threatened to give the finished product an X rating for violence, the production team's facility for ingenious compromise was further tested. Having labored to realize Travis Bickle's climactic one-man, multi-weapon assault with the same detailed realism as the rest of the film, Mr. Scorsese chose to subtly distance the movie's audience from Travis's actions by re-rendering the sequence in a less representational light. 

"I used the phrase 'toned the color down,'" Mr. Scorsese told an audience attending the "Taxi Driver" restoration unveiling at the DGA Theater last week. 

Citing experiments in altering color film tones undertaken by director  John Huston and cinematographer  Oswald Morris in 1956's " Moby Dick" and 1967's "Reflections in a Golden Eye," Mr. Scorsese had the section of edited film negative depicting the attack reprinted to radically shift the scene's color values. The alteration was undertaken at Manhattan's TVC labs, a behind-the-scenes city location that, like so many onscreen in the film, has vanished in the intervening 35 years. So has the original piece of negative, and with it the ability to return the sequence to its prior appearance. 

"There's this impression from some people that we can easily go back and restore the original color that generated the controversy," said  Grover Crisp, Sony's senior vice president of asset management, restoration and digital mastering, who, under the supervision of Messrs. Scorsese and Chapman, oversaw the digital restoration of the film. "Technically it's not possible to do that." According to Mr. Crisp, technicians previously shepherding the film's image from celluloid to video for prior DVD editions have inadvisedly attempted to put color back into the sequence without either Mr. Scorsese or Mr. Chapman's input. "All they could do is to kind of digitally mess with the print, which is not a good thing to do," Mr. Chapman said. 

At the DGA Theater, Mr. Scorsese explained that he remains pleased with the result of the compromise. "I liked it a lot," the director said, "it gave [the film] more of a tabloid feel." Recalling a city that so unalterably transformed since "Taxi Driver" had its premiere at the Beekman Theater in 1976, Mr. Scorsese smiled, shrugged and told the crowd at the 2011 premiere: "The whole picture should've looked that way." 