BENGHAZI, Libya—Libyan rebels scrambled their forces late Friday night to block a believed assault by Col. Moammar Gadhafi's troops on Benghazi, as a brief euphoria over United Nations action gave way to fears that Western intervention may come too late to save the month-old revolution.

The rebels' Voice of Free Libya radio broadcast frantic appeals calling on rebel fighters to block government forces along the costal road, urging them to take positions in Qamines, some 30 miles south of Benghazi, and in Maghroun, about 45 miles away.

"We're in a critical situation: please, defend your country. Protect your city, your homes, your families," the radio urged. "Do not abandon your positions."

While al Jazeera TV reported that Col. Gadhafi's columns were "advancing very quickly" on Benghazi, the rebel leaders in the city said they didn't know what was actually going on at the front lines because the Libyan regime disconnected mobile-phone service in eastern Libya since Thursday. It was impossible to reach the area or obtain independent accounts.

Latset developments

"Most of the defense forces are gone to the coast to protect the city. We've heard that Gadhafi is coming, and we have to take everything seriously," said rebel spokesman Hisham Gheriani as fighters deployed around the revolutionaries' headquarters in the Benghazi courthouse on the Mediterranean corniche.

Nearby, Tareq al Werfalli, a rebel soldier who said he just returned from the Qamines area, said he had not seen any regime troops there. He said that the rumors of the quick advance on the city were spread by Col. Gadhafi's loyalists who are trying to seize Benghazi from within. 

Mr. Gheriani, too, said that the rebel government was aware that Col. Gadhafi's sleeper cells would try to take advantage of the reported offensive, seizing foreigners in Benghazi and attacking other targets here.

Rebel soldiers armed with rocket-propelled grenades and machine guns took up positions on Benghazi's intersections Friday night, and the streets emptied out once the rebel radio started reporting the offensive. 

Trying to cheer up the citizens' spirits, a truckload of teenagers too young to fight slowly drove through Benghazi at night, following a gun-waving horse rider dressed like Omar Mukhtar, the hero of Libya's independence struggle against Italy. The teens waved revolutionary flags and chanted "Allahu Akbar," or "God is Great," as the rider occasionally fired in the air.

Track events day by day.

The sudden shift in the city's mood came after a day of near-euphoric celebrations about the U.N. Security Council's decision to authorize military action to protect Libyan civilians. The emotional roller-coaster started Thursday morning, as Col. Gadhafi vowed to capture Benghazi within hours and launched several air strikes, plunging the city into despair.

Then, after the U.N. vote, which came around midnight local time, the city's sky lit up with celebratory fireworks and the mood shifted dramatically to jubilation. On Friday night, thousands of Benghazi citizens, waving Libya's pre-Gadhafi flag and singing revolutionary songs, thronged to the square outside the courthouse for a street party, bringing their children along.

"Yesterday, there was heavy fear in the city, and now we're all celebrating," said 42-year-old laborer Mustafa Ammar Mohammed, as he took his two sons, ages six and eight, to the square. "If the Security Council had not acted, many of the people you see around would be dead now."

The court house's wall was decorated with a French flag and the sign "Merci France"—an expression of thanks for France's leading role in pushing through the Security Council resolution.

As the faltering Libyan revolution appeared to receive a new lease on life from the UN, the rebel government earlier Friday pledged to press on with its effort to oust Col. Gadhafi.

"Our country is still not liberated, and the revolution is still continuing," said Saleh el Gazal, the rebel head for the city of Benghazi who spent 18 years behind bars for plotting against the Libyan regime. 

According to rebel officials and witnesses, in addition to Friday's fighting on the Benghazi front, Col. Gadhafi's warplanes and artillery also launched a new series of lethal strikes on Misurata, the only city in western Libya that has not yet fallen under government control. Rebel officials urged the international community to act as soon as possible on the U.N. resolution. 

"What are they waiting for?" asked Salwa Bugaigis, a spokeswoman for the transitional rebel government in Benghazi. "Since 7 a.m. this morning, Gadhafi has been trying to exterminate Misurata."

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 