Writing can be exhausting, frustrating and emotionally draining. But in the correct setting, it can also be empowering. 

Kamy Wicoff, founder of the online writing community SheWrites.com and co-founder of the New York Salon of Women Writers, has devoted her professional life to providing women writers with a supportive space to discuss their ideas, advice on improving their work and even tools for publishing the final product. 

Personally, she's devoted to the same mission.

Ms. Wicoff recently donated $20,000 to Girls Write Now, an organization that pairs high school girls from underprivileged New York City schools with professional writers for yearlong mentorships. 

It's the largest gift the group has ever received from an individual, and doubles the amount Ms. Wicoff donated in 2009. Girls Write Now had a 2010 annual budget of $360,000, though that's expected to increase by about $100,000 this year, according to founder and executive director Maya Nussbaum. 

"Writing is about more than publishing, it's about having a voice and learning the power of telling your own story," Ms. Wicoff said. "Giving voice to people that haven't had it is really transformative both for that individual and for the whole society."

Ms. Wicoff is author of the book, "I Do But I Don't: Why the Way we Marry Matters." She said she feels so passionate about Girls Write Now because it helps teach girls that their stories are "worth being heard."

The 13-year-old organization, works with about 300 girls annually. In addition to pairing girls with memoirists, poets, playwrights and other writers, Girls Write Now conducts monthly workshops, reading series and college preparatory services, and publishes an annual anthology of the girls' work. 

Ms. Wicoff was never herself a mentor, saying the time commitment was too great as she was ramping up She Writes. But she joined the advisory board of Girls Write Now two years ago and became a member of the board of directors this fall. 

"Getting to the next level as an organization is something that Kamy really helped us identify and really stepped up to the plate to deliver on," said Ms. Nussbaum, who says the group's mission is "to nurture the next generation of women writers."

Ms. Wicoff hopes She Writes' global membership base—currently 13,000 strong—could help Girls Write Now expand. As She Writes develops more online curriculum, the company will share it with Girls Write Now to help that organization build its web presence for application outside New York.

 Write to  Melissa Korn at melissa.korn@dowjones.com 