Much of the northern half of the U.S.—from Montana to New York—faces an above-average risk of flooding in the next few weeks as new rainstorms loom after a winter of heavy snows, the National Weather Service said Thursday.

Spring floods already have hit portions of the Ohio River Valley and northern New Jersey, but the worst is yet to come, the weather service said.

"We've had an extremely active weather pattern, moving storms across the northern tier of the country this winter, leading to very saturated soils and heavy snow pack," said  Gary Carter, director of hydrologic development at the weather service. "If temperatures warm up and we get more systems moving rain, it's going to flood."

Areas with the highest risk of flooding include the Red River of the North, along the North Dakota-Minnesota border; the Milk River in eastern Montana; the James and Big Sioux rivers in South Dakota; the Minnesota River; the upper Mississippi River basin from Minneapolis to St. Louis; and portions of lower New York, eastern Pennsylvania and northern New Jersey.

Cities that have a greater than 95% chance of major flooding include Fargo and Grand Forks, N.D.; St. Paul, Minn.; Davenport, Iowa; and Rock Island, Ill., the weather service said.

Warm temperatures this week could cause much of the snowpack to melt across South Dakota and southern Minnesota, setting off moderate to major flooding in eastern South Dakota next week, according to the weather service. Minor flooding could begin this week on the Mississippi River and its tributaries over southeastern Minnesota and southwestern Wisconsin, leading to moderate to major flooding by early April.

A series of storm systems expected to move across the region during the next two weeks may cause minor flooding in the headwaters of the northward flowing Red River, eventually leading to major flooding sometime from the last week of March through early April, the weather service said.

Michael Redlinger, city manager of Moorhead, Minn., on the Red River, said the city has already filled some 1.1 million sandbags, with a goal of 1.5 million. Starting next Thursday, hundreds of volunteers will begin putting the sandbags in place, lifting the level of flood protection to a few feet greater than the record set in 2009. "I think we're as prepared as we can be," he said. "Weather is still the No. 1 wild card." 

The spring-flood outlook is based on a compilation of individual river-level forecasts across the country, heavy rains in the fall, which affects soil saturation, record snows in many places this winter and continuing cold temperatures that prevented an early melt, a spokeswoman said.

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com 