SIKESTON, Mo.—River levels dropped Tuesday after the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers blasted a hole in a Missouri levee, lifting hopes in Illinois and Kentucky towns where flood walls had strained against the swollen Ohio and Mississippi rivers.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

As of 9 p.m. local time Tuesday, the Ohio River at Cairo, Ill., —which had been mandatorily evacuated—had fallen by more than a foot and a half, to 59.95 feet from 61.72 feet before the 10 p.m. explosion Monday.

"It saved our town," said Cheryl James, a resident of Mounds, Ill., where river waters began to recede overnight. The water had been up to her second step Monday night. On Tuesday, her sidewalk was dry. 

The sense of relief in Mounds and other river towns came at the sacrifice of Missouri farmers who cultivate more than 130,000 acres in the Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway now inundated by the controlled breaching of the levee. 

What once had been a broad vista of well-tended farms was replaced Monday by a vast lake, with treetops and some farm buildings poking through the surface of the water. Worried growers took up positions with binoculars along the levee, along with cattle seeking dry land. 

"We hope that by blowing the levee that it did help somebody," said Ray Presson, 56 years old, who farms 2,400 acres that were under several feet of water. "It didn't help us much, for sure."

Farmers filed a lawsuit Tuesday seeking class-action status, charging that the Corps wrongfully took their property by allowing water to deluge the floodway. More than 50 farmers gathered at a Charleston, Mo., library to listen to lawyers filing the lawsuit. Lester Goodin, who farms 560 acres, said he signed up as a plaintiff to make sure he would have the wherewithal to rebuild once the water subsides.

"We must start now try to reclaim our land, our livelihoods, our lives," he said. 

The Corps' breaching of the levee activated the floodway, which is diverting water for 35 miles before returning it to the Mississippi at New Madrid, Mo. The floodway is one of four developed by the Corps under a plan dating to the aftermath of the great flood of 1927. It consists of a mix of public and private lands, much of which have easements granting the Corps the right to run water through. 

Missouri officials had fought the floodway's opening all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. But the Corps was found to have legal authority to use the floodway to lower river levels. 

To be sure, farmers in the floodway knew the floodway could be operated again. Locals have long called it "the Spillway." The area floods frequently amid heavy precipitation. 

It could be weeks or months before the waters recede. The Corps expects to rebuild the levee, but can't be sure when that will happen. 

U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said the federal government would pay claims to farmers with crop insurance, but it wasn't clear whether growers have sufficient insurance to cover losses of houses, barns and other property.

Officials downriver in Tennessee and Mississippi were bracing for what authorities said could be near-record crests of the Mississippi River in coming days. Dyersburg, Tenn., Mayor John Holden said he "strongly encouraged" residents in certain parts of town to evacuate, and dozens have done so. Many there are still rebuilding from flooding that killed more than 30 people a year ago.'

The Corps pumped an aluminized slurry blasting agent into three 11,000-foot pipes built into the top of the levee, said Corps spokesman Jim Pogue. Technicians then wired up a series of T3 explosives to explode the agent inside the pipes. The goal wasn't to destroy the levee, but to fracture it, allowing the water to break through and flow into the floodway. The blast went off Monday about 10 p.m. local time

Col. Vernie Reichling, commander of the Corps' Memphis district, said the operation was a success, while calling it "historic and tragic."

Some floodway farmers live elsewhere, while those who evacuated are mostly staying with family and friends. Mr. Presson said he, his brother and his brother's wife were staying at a cousin's house in Charleston.

Bryan Feezor, who farms 1,500 acres in the floodway, had planted about 350 acres of corn during a dry spell in March, when the flood outlook wasn't so dire.

"If I had known this was going to happen, that corn would still be sitting in a bag," he said. He didn't buy crop insurance because he said it's too expensive in the floodway, even though the area was used to carry water only once before, in 1937.

Mr. Presson said he thought the water destroyed 550 acres of wheat he planted in October and that he would be unable to plant spring corn. But he might be able to plant soybeans if the water dries up quickly. "We have to be optimistic," he said. "Or we just have to put our hands down on our heads and cry."

—Jennifer Levitz contributed to this article.

 Corrections & Amplifications  A photo in an earlier version of this story and an accompanying slideshow showed Ray Presson. Mr. Presson was incorrectly identified as Roy. 

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com and Ilan Brat at ilan.brat@wsj.com 