One summer evening in 1997, Mark Elijah Rosenberg climbed up to the roof of his apartment building on 14th Street near Avenue A, taped a bedsheet to a wall, and invited some friends over to watch an assortment of short films threaded through a 16mm projector.

Fourteen years later, Rooftop Films—the nonprofit arts organization that Mr. Rosenberg founded—is one of the most popular seasonal pastimes for cinema-minded New Yorkers. And this year, thanks to an evolving curatorial and fund-raising initiative, it is also a participant in the creation of some of the films on display, rather than a mere screener of them.

The organization's latest series begins Friday, with an adventurous program of 206 films (23 features and 183 shorts) in 36 programs at 10 locations around the city, from a pier on the East River to a cooperative farm in Queens.

"People are so saturated with media that going to a movie is not the event it once was," Mr. Rosenberg said recently in Rooftop's busy office in the Old American Can Factory near the Gowanus Canal. "It's cookie-cutter. We make the experience of watching a movie an event again."

What that means, for example, is when the Swedish comedy "The Sound of Noise" screens on May 19 at the Solar One pier on East 23rd Street, the musicians who play the movie's fanciful "sonic terrorists" will also be there, performing some of the subversive themes that turn random urban sounds into music.

Robert Greene, a Beacon, N.Y.-based documentarian, has something even punchier for the July 28 screening of his latest film, "Fake It So Real," at a used-car lot in Williamsburg. Its subjects, the members of the independent Millennium Wrestling Federation of Lincolnton, N.C., will stage a full-on wrestling match in a temporary ring erected for the occasion.

"People have said it's a surprisingly heartwarming film," said Mr. Greene, whose previous documentary, "Kati With an I," was a Gotham Award nominee this year. This will be the third Rooftop appearance for the director, whose short films were screened in 2002 and 2006. "I had always thought of them as one of those underground shorts places," he said. "But they're bigger. They reach a level of audience you don't really expect from anyone else and they do it consistently. Everyone wants to be a part of it because they know cool people are going to see their movie, and there's going to be a lot of them, and it's really, really fun."

Also, as Mr. Greene noted, the event's curatorial aesthetic is committed to "true independent films, not pretend independent films." And the grassroots vibe doesn't only extend to local filmmakers such as Zachary Raines, whose black comedy "Freeloader" will make its world premiere Saturday. The new season features work from 36 countries (much of it in the multiple shorts programs). A portion of the selections are culled from film festivals such as South by Southwest, and also include co-presentations with BAMcinématek and the Brooklyn Film Festival. 

Yet, Rooftop also manages to make its own news. Last year, two of its featured documentaries, "Waste Land" and "Gasland," were nominated for Academy Awards. Rooftop also got funding to take "Gasland" director Josh Fox on a six-city tour with the film to places impacted by natural gas drilling, the subject of the documentary.

This year, the organization has channeled funding assistance to another activist documentary, "The City Dark." The film, which screens June 5 on the roof of the Can Factory, explores the scourge of light pollution and efforts by civic groups to enact a "light's out" policy in order to reclaim the wonder of the evening skies. New York filmmaker Ian Cheney received a $10,000 post-production grant through Rooftop's partnership with animation studio Edgeworx, Inc.. For the first time, a film opens with the title credit: "Rooftop Films Presents."

"I thought it was a nice way of thanking them," said Mr. Cheney, "even if it's not 100% conventional to do that... I also like getting people thinking about rooftops at the beginning of the film."

Rooftop's funding—derived from $10 ticket sales, public sources, partnerships and efforts such as its current Kickstarter campaign—be a lifeline for a low-budget filmmaker. "The City Dark," for one, needed extensive color correction to argue its point. "The film mostly takes place in the dark," Mr. Cheney said. "We really wanted to make sure the color of the night and the story of the stars would shine through."

But there still one more task for Mr. Cheney to complete before the film's screening, which will feature a post-show performance by the band Fisherman 3, whose original soundtrack won an audience award at South by Southwest in March. "There's this huge metal halide security light that blasts light onto the rooftop from above the Con Edison parking lot," he said. "I have to figure a way to get them to turn it off."