CALGARY—Uranium stocks sank Monday after several Japanese reactors overheated, stoking fears of partial meltdowns, as a result of last week's earthquake and tsunami. 

Analysts said uranium equities are falling because the market had been pricing in strong growth in demand as countries across the world plan to build new fleets of nuclear power stations to manage their energy needs. But those growth assumptions may be overstretched if public sentiment turns against nuclear power following Japan's problems. 

The Japanese government said Monday that the fuel rods in one reactor have fused together in a partial meltdown. A partial meltdown occurs when uranium fuel begins to melt under high temperatures, but still remains contained within the reactor. The 1979 Three Mile Island accident in the U.S. was a partial meltdown. In a full meltdown, such as the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in the Soviet Union, the rods melt completely and the release of energy causes an explosion that contaminates the surrounding area with radioactive material.

Shares of  Cameco Corp., the world's largest publicly owned uranium mining company, dropped 16% to $31.29 in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange.  Denison Mines Corp. shares dropped 26%. 

  Uranium One Inc. shares dropped 28% and Australia's  Bannerman Resources Ltd. dropped 19% in recent Toronto trading. 

There are 442 nuclear power plants in the world, 54 of which are in Japan, and 60 reactors under construction or refurbishment in 12 countries. 

In the U.S., some lawmakers have begun calling for curbs on nuclear power development. Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass) issued a statement Sunday calling for a moratorium on the construction of new nuclear power plants in the U.S., saying that a similar nuclear accident could happen there. 

Shares of  Southern Co.
SO


0.30
%




, which is building two nuclear power plants in Georgia—the first new reactors in the U.S. in decades—declined 1.7% in recent trading, while shares of  General Electric Co.
GE


0.26
%




, which built the Japanese reactors, declined 3%. 

A moratorium on new reactors in the U.S. is unlikely, said  Nick Carter, a uranium analyst with Ux Consulting Co. in Roswell, Ga. However, countries closer to earthquake zones may slow nuclear power development or halt it altogether, he said. 

The effect on world-wide nuclear growth "will depend upon how things play out in Japan over the next few days or weeks," Mr. Carter said. "If nothing happens other than radioactive steam releases, I don't think that will be detrimental to anyone's health. But if it worsens and you have a full core meltdown, that would certainly be catastrophic." 

So far, the three Japanese reactors experiencing cooling problems haven't released significant amounts of radiation, but the situation is dangerous, as an explosion Monday morning in Japan damaged a pump bringing in cooling seawater at one reactor and a third reactor began experiencing cooling problems Monday afternoon. 

Mr. Carter said countries that had been considering building new nuclear plants, such as Indonesia, Vietnam or Turkey,may decide not to after the Japanese incident. 

And China, which is building more than twice as many new reactors as Russia, the next fastest-growing nuclear power adopter, could be forced to delay its development, Mr. Carter said. "Given that many of these reactors they're building will be on the coastline, I think they will have to potentially look closer at the standards at which they build them," he said. 



 Write to  Edward Welsch at edward.welsch@dowjones.com 