One week after a bullet went through U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords's brain during a mass shooting in Tucson, doctors removed the breathing tube from her throat Saturday, freeing her from a ventilator.

The removal of the breathing tube could allow Ms. Giffords to eventually speak. It was another small, but positive step forward in Ms. Giffords' recovery, which has amazed doctors at Tucson's University Medical Center, where she is recovering after a shooting that left 6 dead and 14 injured.

Ms. Giffords has been able to breathe on her own for several days, but doctors had left the breathing tube in place to protect her airway from infection. On Saturday morning, doctors removed the tube from her throat and replaced it with a tracheotomy tube inserted directly into her windpipe.

Doctors said the tracheotomy tube would continue to protect Ms. Giffords airway from infection, while freeing her from the ventilator. On Saturday, a spokeswoman at the hospital said that she couldn't elaborate on the reason for the tracheotomy tube. 

Doctors also inserted a feeding tube to provide Ms. Giffords with more calories. Both procedures are typical for brain trauma patients, hospital officials said in a statement released Saturday morning.

With the removal of the breathing tube from her throat, doctors may be able to discern if Ms. Giffords is capable of speech. That would be a major leap in her recovery and prognosis, brain experts have said. A hospital spokeswoman said Ms. Giffords had not made any attempts to speak today.

Even if Ms. Giffords is capable of speech, it could take Ms. Giffords hours or days to regain use of her voice after the breathing tube is removed. The tube, inserted during most major surgeries, can irritate the voice box and make speech painful after it is removed.

According to the website of Mayo Clinic, speech is possible with a tracheotomy under some conditions. "Depending on the tube size and design, the diameter of your trachea and the condition of your voice box, you may be able to use your voice with the tube in place," the website says.

According to the website for the American Association of Critical Care Nurses, the advantages of a tracheotomy tube, also called a tracheostomy tube, over a breathing tube are that "the patient is usually more comfortable, the patient may be able to drink or eat with the tracheostomy tube in place, and the tracheostomy tube may make it easier for the patient to breathe."

Ms. Giffords remains in critical condition.

The hospital also released another shooting victim today, 58-year-old James Tucker. 

Aside from Ms. Giffords, two shooting victims remain at the hospital, both listed in good condition.

After a week of daily press conferences to offer updates on Ms. Giffords' and others' medical status, hospital officials said Friday that they would now hold only periodic briefings when there is significant change in a patient. The next medical briefing is scheduled for Monday, hospital officials said. 

—Michael Rothfeld contributed to this report.

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 