Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces advanced on the rebel capital of Benghazi, as his jets bombed the city for the second day in a row and resistance appeared to be vanishing in the recently captured city of Ajdabiya.

Leaders of the month-old Libyan uprising insisted that Benghazi, a city of 700,000 residents where opposition to Col. Gadhafi has always been strong, wouldn't fall easily—even if the international community doesn't step in time. 

"Benghazi is a hard city to conquer, and we're not afraid," said Maj. Gen. Gothrani. "We're fighting for a cause, while Gadhafi is fighting to keep a rusty chair."

The head of the rebel council managing the city, Saleh el Gazal, a 70-year-old businessman who spent 18 years in jail for opposing Col. Gadhafi's rule, said Benghazi would be able to hold out for a long time. "We have no fear of running out of supplies—our stocks will last three or four months," he said.

Thursday's bombing raids, near the airport on the southern edge of Benghazi, killed one shepherd and injured at least 12 civilians, rebel officials said. 

Libyan state media declared the army was on the outskirts of the city. That claim was exaggerated, witnesses said, but Maj. Gen. Ahmad Gothrani, a senior commander in the rebel army, acknowledged that government tanks had advanced along the four-lane highway to Benghazi, engaging in heavy fighting in the oil port of Zueitina that still continued in the late afternoon. 

Reports of raids and the advances prompted stores and businesses in Benghazi, which maintained an air of normality until just a couple of days earlier, to close down on Thursday.

Gas stations on the southern side of the city were also closed, and many residents started to pack up and flee. 

As some civilians and rebel supporters fearing Col. Gadhafi's retribution prepared to escape across the border to Egypt, the black-market exchange rate for the Libyan dinar in rebel-held areas plummeted to as low as 1.80 against the dollar, compared with 1.25 two weeks earlier and some 1.50 last week. 

In the port of Tobruq near the Egyptian border, the influx of refugees from Ajdabiya stopped on Thursday, as Col. Gadhafi's forces appeared to have shut down the only exit route from the city. Four journalists for the New York Times, last in contact with their editors from Ajdabiya Tuesday, remained missing. 

Doctors in Ajdabiya have put the death toll in the city at several dozen. The student's relatives said that an ambulance carrying him was shot at by government troops in Ajdabiya; relatives brought him across the desert to Tobruq in a flatbed pickup truck.

Rebel spirits were buoyed somewhat on Thursday by reports that their anti-aircraft artillery managed to shoot down at least one Gadhafi warplane near Benghazi. 

At Tobruq's main square, renamed in honor of King Idris of Libya, who was deposed by Col. Gadhafi in 1969, celebratory shooting erupted after loudspeakers broadcast the news.

"We'll die if we need to, but Gadhafi will never rule over us again," said Ramadan Hukuma, a rebel commander in the square, picking up a rock from the ground. "We will fight to the very end, even if these rocks are all that we have left to fight with." 

Another man said approvingly that Mr. Hukuma had been a known troublemaker in the city, but after the revolution straightened his ways and helped maintain law and order. According to Mr. Gazal, the crime rate in Benghazi plummeted after the revolution, as proud volunteers spontaneously maintained security.

The shared hatred of Col. Gadhafi's 42-year-long rule has united secular intellectuals, former street thugs with few previous political inclinations, Islamists who once harbored al Qaeda sympathies, and Libyan émigrés to the West. The rebel council is headed by Col. Gadhafi's former justice minister, and its army by Libya's defected minister of interior.

All of them were clamoring for the U.S. and allies to intervene in the war against Col. Gadhafi's rule. "We need your help," urged Akram Abed Rabbo, an agricultural engineer in Tobruq. "Help us get rid of Gadhafi." 

Shelling also resumed Thursday against the coastal city of Misrata, the only rebel-held city in western Libya, a day after pro-Gadhafi troops tried to storm the city's center. A doctor in the city said at least 21 people were killed over the two days of fighting, including three rebels who died in clashes with government troops on Thursday. 

The doctor said surgical supplies were running low in the city, 130 miles east of Tripoli. Photographs coming out of the city showed damage to several buildings including a mosque and a library in the center.

A resident, who is affiliated with the rebel military and civilian councils that were established after rebels took control of the city last month, said Misrata had been without water for almost one week and that cellphone coverage was disconnected Tuesday.

He said that troops were stationed in farmland to the west and east as well as at the air force academy and civilian airport in the south and that they were targeting anyone affiliated with the rebels through assassination, kidnapping or the use of snipers on rooftops in areas close to the center.

He said one of his relatives was killed over the weekend when his vehicle was sprayed with bullets while traveling to his farm on the outskirts. 

Rebels planted roadside bombs at the entrances of the city to impede the advance of government troops, according to this person. "Our goal is the toppling of the regime, no dialogue, no negotiations," he said.

—Muneef Halawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 