Little League players love composite bats. With their light swing and springy action, the bats make young players feel like home run kings. 

But this season, for the first time, Little League is banning most composite-barrel bats because they enable kids to hit the ball too fast and too far. The moratorium follows years of percolating concern about injury rates in youth sports.

The timing of the youth ban caught bat makers, retailers and parents by surprise. Little League, the world's largest youth baseball organization with 2.6 million participants, announced bans on composites for older kids and for its giant 12-and-under divisions last year.

As the Little League season got under way last week in much of the country, the effects were felt in dugouts and in the stands. Many parents are painfully realizing the $200 bat they bought for their child is prohibited. Little League spokesman  Steve Barr says the league banned the bats as soon as it had the results of an independent study indicating that some composite bats, after repeated use, become more springy, launching a baseball faster and farther the more often they hit one. 

In contrast, metal-alloy bats usually decrease in efficiency as they become misshapen with use. Wood bats may break—but otherwise they neither lose nor gain in performance. 

With a core made of titanium or carbon fiber plus various resins and sheathed in aluminum, composite bats are much lighter than old-style metal bats. Visually, though, it can be hard to tell the difference. The composites' trampoline-like action propels a baseball more forcefully than what all-metal or wood bats of the same weight and size can do.

Adding to the confusion, Little League has released a list of exemptions, granting certain composite bats waivers.

"Coaches and umpires have to figure out whether or not a given bat is allowed," says  Michael Taylor of Salisbury, Md., an umpire in his 36th season officiating at high school and Little League games. "This situation is a nightmare." 

  Matthew Bender, who sells bats at retailer CloseoutBats.com, says he has received calls from parents who are standing on the baseball field. They ask for clarification on the status of a particular composite bat and then hand their cellphone over to an umpire. "These are people who bought bats from us that are on the allowed list, but the umpires tell them the kid can't use them," Mr. Bender says. 

Every baseball season seems to bring at least one new report of a young pitcher or infielder gravely injured after taking a line drive to the head or the chest. Many leagues now recommend or require that pitchers wear a heart guard, a protective chest pad. 

Still, in terms of overall injuries, baseball is a comparatively safe sport. Some experts say overuse injuries, such as those to the shoulder or elbow resulting from pitching too often, present at least as much of a concern as batted balls. 

Little League officials say competitive fairness, not safety, prompted the moratorium. "We are doing it from a performance standpoint," says Mr. Barr. "One of the reasons we wanted to examine this now and start drawing a line is the technology keeps improving from year to year," he adds. "We felt that we had to get out in front of it."

Closeoutbats.com's Mr. Bender says, "For several years, there has been a constant whisper about just how well this [composite] technology is performing and the fact that every year the bats have been getting better." In recent years, more parents have been coming in and saying, "We've got to get Timmy one of those bats that Johnny used to hit the ball a mile," he says. 

Little League isn't the only youth baseball game in town, of course. The Babe Ruth League's Cal Ripken division allows composite youth bats. 

The National Collegiate Athletic Association announced a ban on composite bats in 2009 and the National Federation of State High School Associations did so in 2010. 

Not all experts agree there is a safety issue at stake. "The data on different injury rates from different bats is not strong enough to be definitive," says  Dawn Comstock, principal investigator for Ohio State University's Center for Injury Research and Policy. "The difference between ball speed coming off of different bats is not that great." 

Dr. Comstock adds, "You would be much more effective protecting pitchers if, instead of regulating the type of bats used, you simply required pitchers to wear a helmet, particularly a helmet with a face shield."

As for the Little League, Mr. Taylor, the umpire, says, "they could tamp down a lot of parent anger over the confusion and money spent on unusable bats if they just admitted it was about safety. No one is going to complain about that. They can say it's about the speed the ball comes off the bat and that's true—but the reason that's a problem is because of safety."

  Mike May, spokesman for the Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association and founder of an organization called Don't Take My Bat Away, says he thinks the composite-bat ban will be bad for the future of youth baseball. "Baseball is already a negative game," he says. "A great hitter gets out two out of three times up. A lot of kids give up at 12 to 14 years old and that will increase if you take away better bats."

 Write to  Alan Paul at editor@wsj.com 