A lawyer for Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam attempted to discredit the government's star witness in an insider-trading trial, accusing him of telling "a monstrous lie" to hide payments from the hedge-fund trader and others. 

The witness, former McKinsey & Co. partner  Anil Kumar, has testified about giving Mr. Rajaratnam inside information regarding his consulting clients in exchange for more than $2 million in offshore payments.

In combative cross-examination Tuesday,  John Dowd, a lawyer for Mr. Rajaratnam, said Mr. Kumar had committed "a monstrous lie" by executing Galleon account forms in his housekeeper's name at an address in India where she didn't live.

"I'm not sure what you mean by monstrous," Mr. Kumar answered. "I obeyed the managing partner of Galleon, Mr. Raj Rajaratnam's instructions."

Mr. Rajaratnam, 53 years old, is facing 14 counts of conspiracy and securities fraud. He has denied wrongdoing, and Mr. Dowd had said his client didn't solicit or trade on inside information. He is among 26 people charged in a criminal insider-trading probe; 19 have pleaded guilty.

Mr. Kumar, 52, has pleaded guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud. McKinsey has said Mr. Kumar violated the firm's "culture, values and policies."

The cross-examination was Mr. Dowd's first opportunity to cast doubt on a key government witness in the case. Under aggressive questioning, Mr. Kumar insisted his misstatements on documents and violation of his duties at McKinsey were done at the behest of Mr. Rajaratnam. 

The confrontation pitted a gravelly voiced Mr. Dowd, a 69-year-old former Justice Department and military lawyer, with Mr. Kumar, a bookish Indian-born consultant.

Earlier in the day, Mr. Kumar had testified that Mr. Rajaratnam had suspected federal agents were on his trail in the weeks leading up to his 2009 arrest but had continued to pass along inside information to his associates.

In direct examination by prosecutors, Mr. Kumar testified that Mr. Rajaratnam told him in 2009 that he had heard that a former colleague was taping conversations for the government.

During a trip to Miami, he said he and Mr. Rajaratnam swapped information about companies, "sat out on the beach" and took an evening boat trip. 

"We were in deck chairs on the beach," Mr. Kumar testified, when Mr. Rajaratnam walked away to take a phone call. When he returned, he said, "I just got a call. Cisco is buying a company called Starent," referring to Starent Networks Corp. 

Mr. Kumar, who testified that he had never heard of Starent, said he decided to buy a few thousand shares "as a way for me to try and remember it." The Cisco deal was announced Oct. 13, 2009, three days before he and Mr. Rajaratnam were arrested, but he said he didn't realize he had made money on it until much later.

During the Miami conversation, Mr. Kumar testified that Mr. Rajaratnam told him he was "really disappointed" because "there's another gentleman who used to work for me who I'm told is now wearing a wiretap." Then Mr. Rajaratnam cautioned him only to call using prepaid, disposable phones. "You should be careful," he said, according to Mr. Kumar. 

"Did he tell you the name of the person who he thought was wearing a wire?" Assistant U.S. Attorney Jonathan Streeter asked Mr. Kumar. "Mr. Ali Far," Mr. Kumar answered. 

At the time, Mr. Far, a former Galleon employee who had started a hedge fund in California, was cooperating with prosecutors. He has also pleaded guilty in the case. His lawyer declined to comment.

During cross-examination, Mr. Kumar said that though he knew whether Mr. Rajaratnam had made money based on his tips, he was not involved in actual trading activity. 

"You never agreed with Mr. Rajaratnam to engage in insider trading, did you sir?" Mr. Dowd asked. 

"No sir," Mr. Kumar answered. "I would not had done it had I known he would ask me for that information, sir."

Mr. Dowd also highlighted Mr. Kumar's failure to report payments from Mr. Rajaratnam on his tax returns to the Internal Revenue Service.

"In fact, they were fraudulent," Mr. Dowd said.

"Is that a question?" countered Mr. Kumar, who testified that he had turned over his income from Mr. Rajaratnam to the U.S. and had paid an additional $1 million to cover his potential tax liability.

Mr. Dowd asked Mr. Kumar what promises he had received from the government in exchange for his cooperation. In his opening statement last week, Mr. Dowd had said government witnesses were testifying to "save their own skins."

"It's important that you testify in this court to make Mr. Streeter happy, correct?" Mr. Dowd said Tuesday, referring to the lead prosecutor in the case.

"Wrong," Mr. Kumar responded. He said he was testifying to "uphold the law" and let the jury decide whether Mr. Rajaratnam should be convicted. 

The jury also heard part of a July 2008 conversation in which then- Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.42
%




 director  Rajat Gupta told Mr. Rajaratnam the big securities firm was considering buying a commercial bank. 

"And, you know, it was, uh, a divided discussion in the board," Mr. Gupta said on the taped call. 

Earlier this month, the Securities and Exchange Commission alleged in a civil case that Mr. Gupta had passed along inside information about Goldman to Mr. Rajaratnam.

Goldman declined to comment. An attorney for Mr. Gupta, who left Goldman's board in May, has said he hasn't been accused of trading on stock tips, or being compensated for the information he allegedly gave Mr. Rajaratnam.

—Liz Rappaport contributed to this article.

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com and Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com 