General Motors said it will invest $2 billion in 17 factories in eight U.S. states and add 4,000 workers through recalls of idle workers and new hiring by 2014. 



Tata Motors said its U.K.-based unit Jaguar Land Rover might face supply disruptions due to the recent earthquake and tsunami in Japan which forced most automobile and auto parts makers there to shut factories temporarily.



Emirates Airline, the Middle East's largest carrier, posted a 55% surge to $1.5 billion in net profit for its latest fiscal year, boosted by double-digit gains in both passenger and cargo traffic. 



EasyJet said its full-year outlook remains in line with expectations and will its first dividend in 2012 despite posting a fiscal first-half loss of £144 million ($236.1 million), up from £67 million a year earlier, on higher fuel prices. 



Russian Helicopters postponed a $500 million flotation on the London Stock Exchange because of insufficient demand from investors, people familiar with the situation said. Last month, the company said it would seek a dual listing on the London and Moscow exchanges.



Citigroup became a $40 stock for the first time since late 2007, as its share price appeared to rise more than 850% from Friday's close after completing a 10-for-1 reverse stock split.



Danske Bank, Denmark's largest bank by market capitalization, reported an 8% decline to 707 million kroner ($136 million) in first-quarter earnings as declining interest income and lingering weakness in its Irish operations weighed on the result. 



PKO Bank Polski, Poland's largest bank by assets, said first-quarter net profit rose 21% to 871 million zlotys ($317.9 million) on higher volume and strong growth across most of its businesses, but missed market forecasts on lower-than-expected fee and commission income. 



Foster's Group was officially unshackled from its underperforming wine assets, but the market remained unconvinced that a takeover of the iconic Australian brewer is imminent.



 CKX, which owns the rights to television singing competition "American Idol," has agreed to sell itself to private-equity firm Apollo Global Management for roughly $509 million.  



Coach, which markets accessories and gifts for women and men, said it plans a secondary listing of its shares in Hong Kong by year's end, the latest luxury brand seeking to use a presence on the local exchange to boost its profile among China's fast-growing affluent class.



Roberto Cavalli Group, which owns the flamboyant Cavalli label, has signed a joint venture agreement with Shanghai-based UCCAL Group to open 100 stores in China over the next five years, the Italian luxury-goods company said.

AIG's largest private shareholder said he misjudged the price at which the U.S. might be willing to sell its shares in the insurer.



 Goldman Sachs said the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission is investigating its Goldman Sachs Execution and Clearing division's role as clearing broker for an unnamed SEC-registered broker dealer.  



U.S. chemicals firm DuPont said it is confident its bid for Danish food ingredients and enzymes maker Danisco will be successful and confirmed that the offer won't be raised further. DuPont has offered 700 kroner ($134.75) a share for Danisco and the acceptance period expires Friday.



Community Health Systems withdrew its sweetened offer to buy U.S. rival Tenet Healthcare Corp. from a week ago, after the latter rejected the bid as undervaluing the company. 



U.S. solar-panel maker First Solar Inc. and China Power International New Energy Holding said they will collaborate on solar-energy projects. The arrangement helps First Solar gain access to China's solar sector amid shaky conditions in Europe, the world's leading solar market.



Novartis Chief Executive Joe Jimenez has sent a strongly worded memo to the company's more than 100,000 employees after the Swiss pharmaceuticals firm ousted several senior managers for misconduct. 



Adecco, the world's largest temporary-employment company by sales, expects further growth this year despite the prospect of a jobless economic recovery, as it posted a 77% increase to €100 million ($143.5 million) in first-quarter net profit. 



German mail and logistics company Deutsche Post confirmed its 2011 outlook after first-quarter earnings before interest and taxes jumped 23% to €629 million ($902.7 million), beating analyst forecasts.

Separately, the European Commission extended a formal probe into subsidies the German government gives Deutsche Post to cover its legacy employee pension costs. Germany has allowed increases in regulated letter prices to cover these costs.



 Microsoft agreed to buy Internet phone company Skype Technologies for $8.5 billion in cash—the most aggressive move yet by Microsoft to play in the increasingly converged worlds of communication, information and entertainment. 



 Apple and Google defended their privacy practices before U.S. Senate lawmakers at a hearing on how the companies collect consumers' location and other data through their smartphones. 



Mobile phones that collect people's locations are only the tip of the iceberg: Auto makers, insurance companies and even shopping malls are experimenting with new ways to use this kind of data. 

Google disclosed plans for an online music service similar to one recently launched by Amazon.com, a move that escalates the battle to create the next generation of Internet businesses for storing and listening to music. The service lets users store their existing music collection online. 

 Separately, Google told Indian regulators in a confidential February memo that the nation's tough proposed restrictions on Internet content could present serious problems for the company and others hoping to tap a promising growth market. 



Sony is unable to say when it can restore partial service to its PlayStation Network online game system, likely adding to pressure from already frustrated customers who have been subjected to stolen personal data as well as missed deadlines for resumption.



NEC reported a 36% drop to ¥41.1 billion ($512.5 million) in net profit for the fiscal fourth quarter and said it swung to a net loss for the full fiscal year, hit by weakness in its mainstay information-technology-service business as well as the negative impact of the March 11 earthquake. 

The Japanese electronics maker said it posted a net loss of ¥12.5 billion for the full year ended in March, compared with a profit of ¥11.4 billion the previous year. 



Imperial Tobacco Group posted a 34% rise in first-half profit to £926 million ($1.52 billion) on higher sales, but the maker of Lambert & Butler and JPS cigarettes also reported falling volumes. 



TUI Travel has introduced a fuel surcharge to offset rising oil prices and reported its first-half loss narrowed to £255 million ($418 million) from £320 million a year earlier, despite civil unrest in some countries. 



InterContinental Hotels Group said the unrest in the Middle East as well as the recent earthquakes in Japan and New Zealand will hit full year operating profit by $15 million to $20 million, as it posted a 28% rise in first-quarter net profit to $69 million.