Architecture rarely goes viral on the Internet, but a video of Toyo Ito's Mediatheque in Sendai taken at the height of the Japanese earthquake has had an extraordinary run as an eyewitness and vertigo-inducing account of what it was like to be inside a building during the magnitude-9.0 earthquake that struck Japan on March 11. (www.youtube.com/watch?v=heh5ITmYbRs) 

The video was shot by someone who had taken refuge under one of the tables in the audio-visual library on the seventh floor. The building shook and swayed violently; everything cascaded from shelves and desks onto the floor. Ceiling panels appeared to swing drunkenly overhead. But the Mediatheque did not collapse. It stood firm against the massive seismic forces that were tearing other buildings apart; the basic structure did not fail.

Mr. Ito is one of Japan's, and the world's, best-known architects, and the Mediatheque has been celebrated internationally for its visual elegance and radical structural solution. Completed in 2001, it was the winning design in a competition for an interactive multimedia center with a wide range of cultural activities, from the visual and performing arts to computers with free Internet access. It soon became a cool place to hang out. My own memory of its serene and inviting presence on a leafy, tree-lined avenue is irreconcilable with the images of devastation that have filled the media.

But a glass-walled box that emphasizes lightness and transparency—there are seven open floors with almost everything visible from the street—does not suggest invulnerability to an epic natural disaster. This is the kind of architecture that critics of modernism like to call risky and unreliable. When flaws appear, schadenfreude follows. 

It would be easy to call the Mediatheque's survival a miracle, but it would be wrong. The building's extraordinary resilience was the result of a close collaboration between a creative architect and an equally creative engineer, Mutsuro Sasaki, known for his ability to devise innovative systems that turn provocative designs into safe buildings without sacrificing their original vision. Both Mr. Ito and Mr. Sasaki were mindful of lessons learned from the Kobe earthquake of 1995 that took place during the design process. Together, they went beyond Japan's strict earthquake codes for a new aesthetic and structural model.

 Haiti's Gingerbread Reclamation: How some homes withstood the earthquake that devastated the nation.

This brings another legendary earthquake survivor to mind—Frank Lloyd Wright's Imperial Hotel in Tokyo, one of the few structures left standing after the great Kanto earthquake of 1923. Separated by almost a century and a revolution in technology from Mr. Ito's Mediatheque, Wright's building was equally radical in its pursuit of stylistic and engineering advances in its day. But a lot has changed since 1923. Communications and construction have been totally transformed, and so have life and the world. Only the destructive forces of nature remain the same. 

Wright spent many seasick weeks crossing and recrossing the Pacific; today's architects jet through time zones. Computers deliver designs and specifications and assist in their execution on a global scale. It took several days for Wright to receive the news in the famously worded telegram from his client and patron, Baron Okura, that the "building stands undamaged as monument to your genius"—something Wright would have been the last to deny. The Internet gave us instant, live images of how Mr. Ito's building performed under stress.

Wright's Imperial Hotel was a massive, elaborate cave of brick and local Oya stone with a romantic overlay of exotic detail. Its modernism derived from his tradition-shattering Prairie Houses and an idiosyncratic personal style. The hotel was erected on bamboo scaffolding using centuries-old methods of painstaking hand labor.

But Wright's building endured, and that, too, was no accident. What Wright and Mr. Ito had in common was their reliance on the essential teamwork of architect and engineer. Wright had counted on more than his customary hubris when he promised the Japanese an earthquake-proof structure; he brought his own engineer, Paul Mueller, from Chicago to do the job.

Wright and Mueller were familiar with the "floating" foundations developed in Chicago as the new tall buildings rose on unstable, muddy soil. The Imperial Hotel was divided into independent sections attached individually to a floating base meant to move with the shocks; this flexible foundation absorbed the seismic forces that would make a more rigid building collapse. The Imperial Hotel was finally demolished—not by nature, but by man—in 1968, its entrance and lobby re-erected in an outdoor museum of the Meiji period.

Mr. Ito's minimalist aesthetic, with its emphasis on lightness, fluidity and transparency, would have been unthinkable and impossible at that early date; the materials and technologies of modernism were being developed in more industrialized countries. Today Japan is on the cutting edge in the design and digital worlds. But as Mr. Sasaki wrote in a Harvard Graduate School of Design publication in 2002, "no building has pushed architectural or structural thought further than the Sendai Mediatheque."

The architect's challenge to the engineer can be formidable. Mr. Sasaki describes how the process began with a single sketch sent by Mr. Ito from an airport, "expressing a virtual world of indeterminate, seaweed-like tubes swaying freely as they supported floor plates, as though the architecture were without weight or dimension." The image was "poetic but far from any known reality." 

So how does an engineer get from poetic floating seaweed to a building that can withstand a magnitude-9.0 earthquake? How does he deal with "the vision of an architecture without weight or thickness," something so without precedent that it requires an equally unprecedented structural resolution? 

Mr. Sasaki began by breaking the sketch down into its structural parts—floor, beam, column and foundation. Mr. Ito's slender floor slabs were impossible to achieve in concrete without the conventional support of beams or walls; they would have been far too heavy and deep. Instead, Mr. Sasaki used a steel "sandwich" strengthened internally by a network of steel ribs for a slender floor plate only 15¾ inches thick. The welding technique was borrowed from shipyard building.

The stacked floor plates of a multistory building are customarily carried on solid columns. The objective here was to make the columns as light and transparent as possible. Mr. Sasaki substituted a system of hollow steel tubes in the form of open, spiraling lattices formed by smaller steel tubes. There are 13 of these lattice tubes, but only the four largest, 20 to 30 feet in diameter, placed at the corners of the floors, support the building's main loads. 

The nine smaller tubes vary in size and diameter and are placed randomly throughout the building, some straight, some angled, echoing the idea of Mr. Ito's "floating seaweed." These twisted, canted, open supports have a structural strength and rigidity that increases the building's earthquake resistance. They act as light wells and contain elevators, stairs and conduits for utilities. 

At the basement level, the columns are solid and firmly fastened to a below-ground framework connected by beams that can bend and deform without breaking. The large corner columns that channel the building's major forces to the ground also conduct the seismic energy to this framework, where 60% to 70% of it is absorbed, reducing the stresses to the building above. An engineering inspection after the earthquake determined that Mr. Sasaki's system worked. 

Fortunately, the tsunami did not reach the building, and the damage was limited to broken glass on the first and third floors, part of a window on the double-glazed south side, a section of ceiling that had fallen on the top floor, solar equipment, and a rooftop air duct. Repairs are under way, and the Mediatheque has announced that it will reopen up to the fourth floor this month, with the fifth and sixth floors scheduled to open in early June.

It is the structural engineer's rationalism and expertise that translates the architect's intent into the building's final form; he carries the awesome responsibility for its safety and stability in normal and extreme conditions. But the creative relationship between the two, and the complexity and sensitivity of the process, are rarely acknowledged. "The best resolution of art and technique," as Mr. Sasaki sees it, "occurs the moment that structure vanishes as a separate entity and is visually fused with the architectural design." It takes two to tango, to bring vision to reality, to turn a building into art.

 Ms. Huxtable is the Journal's architecture critic.  