AMSTERDAM—Jodi Bieber's photo of a refugee from Afghanistan's Uruzgan region has already become an icon. The portrait shows a close-up of Bibi Aisha, a young woman whose face was disfigured, allegedly by her husband and family, deep in Taliban territory. The photo, featured on the cover of Time magazine in August, jars the viewer by blending a stylized artistic aesthetic with photojournalism's blunt power to illustrate brutal realities. 

It has sparked debate about the moral ambiguities surrounding the idea of a Western military withdrawal from Afghanistan. And it won this year's edition of World Press Photo, the traveling exhibition that opened in Amsterdam's Oude Kerk on April 22 and will hit dozens of cities world-wide. 

The exhibition of some of the best photojournalism from 2010 comes as the profession mourns two of its most uncompromising members, war photographers Chris Hondros and Tim Hetherington, who died while covering the conflict in Libya. Mr. Hetherington won the competition in 2007.

One of the exhibition's most laudable attributes has always been its ability to pull visitors into stories that had largely gone unnoticed —an especially helpful quality in a year in which the pace of world events makes last year's headlines seem distant memories. A number of shocking images recall the earthquake that ravaged Haiti in January 2010. Most memorable among them is Riccardo Venturi's black-and-white shot of a dazed child standing in front of a burning colonial church in Port-au-Prince that looks ready to collapse. Javier Manzano's frame of a man's severed head eulogizes the 15,000 victims of Mexico's drug cartels in 2010.

Some of the most intimate and vibrant work is created far away from the headlines. Darcy Padilla's nine-image panel of the troubled life of impoverished mother Julie Baird represents 18 years of work, while Martin Roemers's colorful shots of street life in Mumbai bring to life the theme of humanity's increasing urbanization.

 Until June 19  

  www.oudekerk.nl  