State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley resigned Sunday after criticizing the military for its treatment of the U.S. Army private accused of leaking cables to the website WikiLeaks.

During a speech Thursday at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Mr. Crowley called Pfc. Bradley Manning's detention conditions "ridiculous and counterproductive and stupid." 

In a statement issued by the State Department Sunday, Mr. Crowley said: "Given the impact of my remarks, for which I take full responsibility, I have submitted my resignation as assistant secretary for public affairs and spokesman for the Department of State." 

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she accepted his resignation "with regret."

Pfc. Manning is being held in a maximum security prison at the Marine Corps' base in Quantico, Va. Amnesty International raised concerns about his detention earlier this year in a letter to Defense Secretary Robert Gates. The group complained that guards check on him every five minutes and have deprived him of sheets and require him to sleep only in boxer shorts.

On Friday, President Barack Obama told reporters he had asked the Pentagon whether "the procedures that have been taken in terms of his confinement are appropriate and are meeting our basic standards."

"They assure me that they are," Mr. Obama said. "Some of this has to do with Private Manning's safety as well."

Pfc. Manning was charged last year with downloading classified documents to a personal computer and passing them to the website WikiLeaks, which began posting the material online.

In the statement announcing his resignation, Mr. Crowley said, "The unauthorized disclosure of classified information is a serious crime under U.S. law," but he didn't seem to back away from his earlier remarks.

"My recent comments regarding the conditions of the pre-trial detention of Private First Class Bradley Manning were intended to highlight the broader, even strategic impact of discreet actions undertaken by national security agencies every day and their impact on our global standing and leadership," he said. "The exercise of power in today's challenging times and relentless media environment must be prudent and consistent with our laws and values."

Mr. Crowley previously served as special assistant for National Security Affairs under President Bill Clinton. He also worked on the National Security Council and in the Pentagon's office of public affairs. He spent 26 years in the Air Force, retiring in 1999 at the rank of colonel. 

Prior to joining the Obama administration, Mr. Crowley was a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress, specializing in homeland-security issues.