SHANGHAI—China halted approvals of new nuclear-power plants pending changes to safety standards, signaling a shift toward caution from a country embarked at high speed on the world's biggest expansion program but where public nervousness is growing as a disaster unfolds in neighboring Japan.

The government also ordered integrity checks at existing plants. China has 13 nuclear reactors in operation, at least 25 more under construction, and a five-year plan adopted by the National People's Congress just this month contains approvals for dozens more units. More than 70 additional reactors are in the proposal stage, including for regions with known seismic activity, according to a World Nuclear Association tally.

Premier Wen Jiabao's cabinet, the State Council, "has suspended the approval process for nuclear-power stations so that safety standards can be revised after the explosion at a Japanese plant," the state-run Xinhua news agency reported Wednesday. "Safety is our top priority in developing nuclear-power plants," the State Council said.

Details were vague about how China would conduct its safety review. Analysts said the message stopped well short of a halt in the program, even as they warned that the pace of China's nuclear construction program threatened to outstrip its ability to regulate the industry.

Despite radiation leaks and plant failure in northeastern Japan following last week's earthquake and tsunami, analysts said it was difficult to see how China could achieve its clean-air goals without significant investment in nuclear power.

Analysts said China's program, like those planned in the U.S. and other countries, reflects how the political pendulum had swung in favor of nuclear. 

Not that policy makers considered it risk-free: "Before the Japanese accident happened, there was already an internal debate in China about how fast the program should go," said  Mark Hibbs, a senior associate in Carnegie Endowment for Peace's Nuclear Policy Program.

Most immediately, the State Council message may be aimed at addressing public anxiety about the events in Japan as part of a public-relations exercise. "The politicians can't be indifferent," said  Manouchehr Takin, an analyst at London's Centre for Global Energy Studies.

Concern is building in eastern Chinese cities that deadly levels of radiation from Japan's Fukushima Daiichi plant may drift toward China, even though officials say there is no immediate danger. 

Some Shanghai residents, distrustful of the official line, have been swapping ideas about the best protective clothing and foods to reduce radiation risks. Internet and phone companies have censored some messages warning about perceived risks.

In a new daily reporting system, the Chinese National Nuclear Safety Administration is sending monitors onto the East China Sea with radiation-detection equipment. 

"Nothing unusual has been discovered," the administration reported. Chinese port inspectors have been ordered to check Japanese imported goods for contamination.

The State Council's statement marked a change in approach after steadfast comments from lower-level officials and in the country's nuclear industry that Japan's problems would never deter China from pursuing its nuclear objectives. Some of those officials cited China's plans for superior technology as a reason to be confident in the program. The message from Mr. Wen's cabinet clarified that China's leadership sees room for improvement.

While China does plan next-generation designs for its future plants, an increasing portion of the production will be based on technology transferred to China, unlike in past years when equipment was largely imported from the U.S., France and Japan. 

The industry is also pursuing the tricky and potentially dangerous goal of reprocessing spent uranium, among other technological leaps.

The National Nuclear Safety Administration and other government agencies now face the challenge of hiring, training and retaining enough experts to police a system expanding quickly into multiple sites in distant parts of the country—at a pace one step ahead of the industry.

"There's not enough safety experts to do all that," said Mr. Hibbs. He said Japan's ability to end its emergency will ultimately turn on logistics, expertise and other programs that were years in development.

Billions of dollars are at stake for foreign companies in the Chinese program, and its timetable.

Among the major suppliers to China is  Toshiba Corp.'s
TOSYY


-2.05
%




 Westinghouse Electric, which produces a reactor called the AP1000 that features a passive safety system that doesn't require the same kind of pumps that failed in Japan. 

A Westinghouse spokesman,  Vaughn Gilbert, said in a statement that Westinghouse understands that the situation in Japan will focus more scrutiny on the nuclear industry but said, "We are pleased, though, that government officials from around the world, including China, have expressed ongoing support for nuclear energy." 

Westinghouse is 20%-owned by Louisiana-based  Shaw Group Inc. Shaw's chief executive officer,  J.M. Bernhard Jr., said in a weekend statement that he expected "construction timelines will continue as planned" for plants in the U.S. and China despite the crisis in Japan. 

 Write to  James T. Areddy at james.areddy@wsj.com and Brian Spegele at brian.spegele@wsj.com 