Love stories lend themselves to many different mediums, but it's a rare tale that calls for a couple tubs of chemicals, the light of the sun, and a process gleaned from a 19th-century volume filled with images of algae. That's the medium that artist Lauren Redniss chose for her unusual new book "Radioactive: Marie & Pierre Curie: A Tale of Love and Fallout," which will be the subject of an accompanying exhibit beginning Friday at the main branch of the New York Public Library.

The life of the Curies, a scientific wonder couple who discovered radioactivity and between them won three Nobel Prizes at the dawn of the 20th century, is a story for the ages. But the tale of Ms. Redniss's rendering of that story is nearly as neat. 

"I liked the idea of making a visual book about invisible things," Ms. Redniss said in her office at Parsons the New School for Design, surrounded by a mess of Moleskine notebooks and large sheets of paper bathed in chemically hued blue. She was showing off an archaic process known as cyanotype—"like a camera-less photographic process"—that helped give the ethereal pages of "Radioactive" their distinctive look. 

Ms. Redniss was inspired by cyanotype after coming across a rare copy of "Photographs of British Algae: Cyanotype Impressions," first published in 1843, at the New York Public Library, where she was a fellow at the Dorothy and Lewis B. Cullman Center for Scholars and Writers in 2008-09. For that book, as in Ms. Redniss's own, images were fashioned by chemically treating paper and exposing it, with certain parts blocked out, to ultraviolet rays from the sun. The result, after time, is a negative image that emanates a sort of ghostly indigo glow.

"The idea of doing some kind of primitive chemistry had a lot of resonance with the story," Ms. Redniss said. "But I chose it mostly because the color that radium glows is blue." In "Radioactive," otherworldly blues and other colors streak through a mix of illustrations, photographs and collages that make every page a striking artwork of its own. Integrated with the images is a written narrative, typed in an old-fashioned font designed by Ms. Redniss, that tells an unlikely tale of love, discovery and loss. Much of that comes from the Curies themselves, but just as much owes to the story's discursions into atomic-age history and jumps to locales such as Hiroshima, Three Mile Island and Chernobyl. 

"It's interesting because she is a writer who uses images the way a filmmaker uses cinema," said Ben Katchor, the celebrated cartoonist behind such graphic-novelized comics as "Julius Knipl, Real Estate Photographer." "Her images are not illustrations or appendages of something else." 

Indeed, it is difficult to compare "Radioactive" to other works from any written or visual tradition, except perhaps another book of Redniss's own. That would be "Century Girl," which told the story of 100 years in the life of a former Ziegfeld Follies performer with a mix of visual collage, illustration and handwritten text. 

"Over and over again she finds a forum that works with the subject she wants to explore," said Lawrence Weschler, author of such oddities-appreciating books as "Mr. Wilson's Cabinet of Wonder" and director of the New York Institute for the Humanities at New York University, where Ms. Redniss is currently a fellow. "She's very good with raking perspective and line drawings that are so evocative and yet so simple. There's something simultaneously vertiginous and calm in her style."

Both characterizations apply all the more to the enlarged versions of Ms. Redniss's book pages hung on the walls at the New York Public Library. The "Radioactive" exhibition, which runs through April 17 in the grand hallways adjoining the Rose Reading Room, mixes work from the book with a miscellany of images from deep within the library's own collection. 

There to supervise installation before opening hours on Monday morning, Ms. Redniss was eager to arrange and straighten historical drawings of hairdos and a series of 1930s pre-atomic-era cigarette cards called "This Age of Power and Wonder." She found both during her fellowship at the library, and collected them in a ranging portfolio of inspirations for her telling of the Curies' story. 

"At the library I could see all the rare books and do drawings from a hand-painted 19th-century travelogue or a 15th-century bible," she said. "It was so wonderful to be surrounded by marble."

A sculpture standing regular duty in the library, titled "Frolicsome Girl," seemed to approve of the artist's surroundings, including a coat of bright red paint added to the walls for the occasion. "I like drawing sculptures," Ms. Redniss said, "because there's an extra step of exaggeration and expressiveness in them. You can find your own angle and your own way of looking."