DETROIT—The U.S. Treasury could sell its remaining stake in  General Motors Co.
GM


-0.27
%




 within the next year, an Obama administration official said Wednesday, signaling a much shorter time frame than the auto maker initially expected.

A sale of the U.S. government's remaining stake in the auto maker is "realistic" within the next 12 months, the official said. A stock sale would depend on GM's and the broader financial markets' performance.

The Treasury reduced its GM stake to 26.5% from 61% in November's $23.1 billion GM initial public offering of stock. Last fall, GM Chief Executive  Daniel Akerson said he expected the government could take several years to sell its remaining investment.

GM is eager to cut ties completely with the U.S. government, which poured $49.5 billion into GM in 2009 to usher the Detroit auto maker through a bankruptcy reorganization.

Under terms of the bailout, the auto maker is restricted on how much it can pay top executives as long as the government is part owner, a limit Mr. Akerson says hurts GM's ability to attract and retain executives. The restrictions apply to companies that received money from the Troubled Asset Relief Program.

GM has asked the Obama administration for more flexibility on how it pays executives, including the ability to pay more top managers a larger amount of cash, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

The limits aim to weight compensation packages toward stock rather than cash. The Obama administration hasn't decided whether to grant GM's request, the person said.

The auto maker says its government ties, while reduced from a year ago, remain a turn-off to some potential investors and customers. 

Under terms of the IPO, the government can't sell additional shares until mid-May.

But the auto maker and its stock underwriters have been pushing the Treasury to sell most or all of its remaining stake this year, rather than off-loading shares gradually over the next few years.

The Treasury needs to sell its remaining GM shares at an average price of $53 each to break even on the bailout. GM shares fell 1.3%, or 51 cents, to $37.89 at 4 p.m. Wednesday in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, compared with the $33 IPO price.

A GM spokesman declined to comment.

Separately, GM on Wednesday said its board of directors declared a quarterly dividend of 64.7 cents per share on junior preferred stock. The dividend is payable March 1. The total payout will be about $65 million. 

 Write to  Sharon Terlep at sharon.terlep@wsj.com 