TORONTO—Quebec, Canada's French-speaking eastern province, on Monday unveiled an ambitious economic-development plan that seeks to attract 80 billion Canadian dollars (US$82.7 billion) in new investment for energy, mining and other economic projects in its far north over the next quarter-century. 

Officials said the development drive is aimed at creating tens of thousands of jobs, and generating some C$14 billion in new revenue for the province. Among other opportunities, the plan seeks to identify and exploit energy and mining potential in vast stretches of Quebec that have so far attracted little attention. The development plan also calls for new investment in conservation, wildlife management, tourism and farming.

Amid a global oil and commodities boom, Canada has attracted significant domestic and foreign investment aimed at resource exploitation. Most of that has been targeted at the country's resource-rich and investment-friendly western provinces.

Quebec officials appear now to be eager to tap into that. Canada's federal government largely cedes energy and resource policy to the provinces, allowing provincial capitals wide latitude in drafting policy to attract investment.

The province has long benefited from plentiful hydroelectric power generation. Quebec's northern regions are home to reserves of gold, nickel, cobalt, platinum and other precious and industrial metals.

But Quebec may be a harder sell than some of Canada's other provinces for energy and mining-sector investors looking for new opportunities in the country. The provincial government recently said it had ratcheted up regulatory scrutiny of natural-gas drillers, who had just started to flock to Quebec.

Amid a shale-gas boom across North America, some producers rushed to parts of Quebec, where reserves looked promising. But earlier this year, provincial officials intervened, saying they needed more time to study the effects of gas-drilling techniques before opening further land.

Quebec said the province already has raised government royalty rates for mining, a move that also may temper investor enthusiasm. Quebec said Monday it would table new legislation that would ensure the provincial government obtains a "fair economic return" from any new mining activity. 

In announcing its development plan, Quebec said it had identified 11 new mining-development projects that it expected to attract C$8.24 billion in investment. It said the projects would create 11,000 jobs during the initial construction phases, then 4,000 new jobs once the new mines were in operation. 