TRIPOLI, Libya -- The Libyan government organized a funeral in Tripoli on Thursday for 33 people it said were killed in the latest round of coalition airstrikes, an occasion dozens of supporters of Col. Moammar Gadhafi used to rail against the West, Arab countries, and residents of the rebel-stronghold of Benghazi in the east.

At the seaside cemetery of Shat Hansheer 33 wooden coffins were lined up for the service, but only 13 bodies were ultimately buried amid conflicting accounts about the circumstances of their death. The rest of the coffins were loaded back up on pickup trucks or into ambulances after the service with officials explaining that the families of the dead wished to bury them in other cemeteries.

Officials said that most of the 13 were civilians but several people in attendance said they were volunteer fighters who were killed battling rebels in Misrata and in towns further east alongside the army. Others said they might have been guarding some of the military installations in Tripoli that were bombed by allied forces over the past few days.

"All I know is that 13 volunteer fighters were killed," said a man from the naval base city of Al-Khums, east of Tripoli. He said that he too was a volunteer fighter who had come to the capital but refused to give his name because he was not authorized to speak with reporters.

The funeral service was led by  Sheik Khalid Mohammed, a cleric on the government's payroll. Speaking over loudspeakers, he said that many of the dead were from the same family and that this was proof that they were civilians.

"Even if they were army, it does not matter, we are all army," he said.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Shortly after a heated argument broke out between the cleric and another man who came up to him and called him "a liar." The incident was quickly contained by some of the dozens of armed men and undercover security officers milling about.

"Sarkozy, killer, Jew," some started chanting referring to French President Nicolas Sarkozy.

"This is the doing of the emir of Qatar," said a man carrying his son who wore a green bandana and brandished a toy gun on his shoulders.

Others kept firing volleys of shots in the air from their AK-47s.

Some of the angriest chants were against Benghazi underscoring the rifts emerging between west and east as the bloody standoff entered its second month. "Benghazi you have brought us shame," started one chant. "Either you kill us or we kill you Benghazi," said another.

Earlier in the day there was a more conciliatory mood at another government-organized event. Dozens of tribal elders from the Western Mountain south of Tripoli and other regime loyalists boarded several coach buses in Tripoli and headed east toward the city of Sirte, Col. Gadhafi's birthplace, where they said they would join other tribes for a peaceful march toward Benghazi.

"Our hearts are open for beloved and beautiful Benghazi," read a poster taped to the front of one of the buses.

Some of the tribal elders, in traditional dress and wrapped in wool shawls, said they wanted to initiate dialogue with their counterparts in the east. But it was unclear if they would even reach Benghazi and whether such dialogue was even possible at this stage given that divisions have deepened between tribes still loyal to the regime and those who now want to topple it.Others condemned the allied airstrikes with one tribesman,  Ahmed Oun, 71, saying that President Obama should be stripped of the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to him in 2009.

Separately, Libyan state media broadcast gruesome footage of bodies, one exposed and others in blue bags, it said belonged to those killed overnight in the strikes against military installations in Tajura.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 