JUBA, Sudan—Euphoric southern Sudanese on Sunday formed long lines to cast ballots in a weeklong independence vote, a dramatic step toward the expected splitting of Africa's largest country.

As polls opened at 8 a.m. here in the south's provisional capital, many voters showed strong preference for secession from a country controlled by a central government based in the north. People waved "goodbye" to Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir for television cameras. They held up their open palms, the sign of separation. Several swathed themselves in the flag of southern Sudan—some donned it like a toga, others as a cape.

"It's a big excitement—more than a Christmas celebration," said Joseph Kayi Alex, showing off his ink-dipped finger that proved he voted. He woke at 2 a.m. this morning, he said, too excited to sleep, and arrived at the polls hours before they opened.

The long-awaited day stems from a 2005 peace agreement between the north and the south. Southerners have battled the north for decades over access to resources and for better representation in Khartoum, the seat of the Sudanese government. A civil war that ended after the 2005 peace deal cost two million lives and displaced millions more.

Key events in Sudan's political development

Over the weekend, skirmishes between local nomads and farmers in the contested Abyei region left as many as nine people dead, according to news reports. But the rest of the southern region remained calm as the vote kicked off Sunday, dispelling fears that a secession vote could renew a conflict with the north. By late afternoon, the massive crowds that had descended on polling stations at dawn had dissipated, leaving only short lines.

Sudan President Omar al-Bashir has promised to accept the referendum's results, and has acknowledged that the south is likely to secede. In a rare visit to Juba last week, he said both sides were in "dire need of peace."

The referendum could set a precedent for regions of other African countries where secession campaigns have been waged. In Somalia, the autonomous region of Somaliland in the north has flourished in relative calm. It declared itself independent after an aerial bombardment campaign by Somalia's last federal government, but hasn't been recognized by the international community. Western Sahara, the southern region of Morocco, waged a guerrilla war to win independence from that state. A 1991 peace deal provided for a referendum on independence, but negotiations fell apart over who would be allowed to vote.

A peaceful vote in Sudan also could embolden African leaders in tackling crises on the continent. Regional countries have been involved in brokering Sudan's peace deal and African troops are on the ground in Somalia. Most recently, African leaders have been trying to resolve the political crisis in the Ivory Coast, where President Laurent Gbagbo remains entrenched in office despite worldwide calls for him to step down.

Pitfalls remain in southern Sudan's passage to nationhood. During a six-month transitional period, the north and south must settle on an official border; how to share billions of dollars in oil revenue that come from the south; and resolve the disputed area of Abyei, which is claimed by ethnic groups who are tied to both sides.

Still, neither side appears to want another war, as such a clash would devastate the economies of both sides. A peaceful week of voting and a calm counting process is likely to set a more positive tone for the coming negotiations and could speed their resolution, particularly if Mr. Bashir accepts the likely outcome of separation as he has promised.

In the run-up to the referendum, the U.S. has become deeply engaged in ensuring it goes smoothly and that another conflict doesn't destabilize the region.

Gen. Scott Gration, the U.S. special envoy to Sudan, called the event a "historic moment." It "is not only life changing for the people of southern Sudan, but it will be a significant event for all of Africa and the rest of the world," he said.

A simple majority will either approve or reject independence. Turnout must reach at least 60% of the 3.9 million registered voters or the results will be nullified and a new vote will have to be held.

Local and international observers, including the Carter Center, a nonprofit group founded by former U.S. President Jimmy Carter, and the European Union, are monitoring the vote. 

Polls will be open for at least seven days, but many people still braved hours-long lines for the chance to cast their ballots on Sunday.

David Kuony Chol, 35 years old, woke at 3 a.m. and began hobbling on crutches toward his polling station, even though it wouldn't open for another five hours. "I wanted to be the first to vote," he said, with a broad smile. Mr. Chol, who said it took him 2½ hours to reach the station, was wounded in the leg while fighting for the south's independence in the most recent civil war. "I don't regret it," he said. "After voting today, I hope our country will get independence."

Southern Sudan's president, Salva Kiir, carrying a golden-handled cane, cast his ballot at a polling center erected beside the tomb of John Garang, the southern leader who signed the peace agreement in 2005 that would ensure this referendum. Mr. Garang died in a helicopter crash shortly after the deal was completed, and is revered as the founding father of the south.

An independent southern Sudan would be among the poorest countries on earth, where an estimated 90% live on less than $1 a day. Roads, running water and sanitation are all in short supply, as are health care and education.

Those realities couldn't damp the enthusiasm of many southerners on Sunday. Elizabeth Afajok Deng Biar, a 42-year-old former soldier and mother of seven, who shares the Christian faith of many in the region, clutched a foot-long wooden cross as she waited to cast her ballot. "It's better to suffer in your own land than be oppressed by somebody," she said. Mrs. Biar then held her cross to the sky. "I am a believer."