Multinational companies stepped up efforts to move staff out of Japan as worries grew about the damaged nuclear reactors in the country's northeast. 

After several governments began urging their citizens to leave the country altogether and some began to prepare evacuation flights, "that heightened the concerns of the multinationals," said Dee Runyan, a senior vice president of Radius, a travel-management company in Bethesda, Md. 

Initially there was some relocation of employees to cities south of the capital. Now companies are trying to move not just expatriate employees and their families, but also Japanese employees out of the country, she said. The top choices so far appear to be Hong Kong and Singapore.

The increased urgency came as the U.S. issued a more-dire assessment than the Japanese government of conditions at the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, and said U.S. citizens in the country should consider leaving. Other governments took similar measures.

Medical device maker Medtronic Inc. of Minneapolis said it is paying for air transportation for foreign nationals hired locally in Japan—and their families—to return to their home countries "until such time as it is prudent for them to return to Japan." Medtronic also said it is restricting travel to the country to "business-critical needs."

Alex Puig, regional security director for the Americas with International SOS, a medical and security-assistance concern in Trevose, Pa., said his organization already has helped clients move hundreds of people out of the country, most on commercial flights.

In a video conference Thursday, International SOS had 641 corporate security and other executives participate, and in a quick survey found that 18% of the organizations represented had evacuated personnel and that an additional 40% had helped employees with travel out of Japan.

Aircraft-charter brokers are getting many requests from governments and companies to provide aircraft and crews to evacuate individuals and groups in the coming days. The Air Charter Association of North America, a group of about 20 brokers, "has seen a surge in requests to move people out" of Japan, said David McCown, chairman of the group. His members source planes as small as corporate jets and as large as 747s from commercial and charter airlines and corporate flight departments to aid in emergency and disaster relief operations.

"We are fielding lots of calls about Japan," said Tracey Deakin, chief operating officer of Le Bas International, an aircraft-charter broker based in Shannon, Ireland, and San Luis Obispo, Calif. On Thursday morning, the company got a request to move 185 people to Singapore as soon as possible. It also is working on requests to take urban search and rescue teams from Washington to Misawa Air Base in Japan, to fly 1,300 people from Tokyo to Kobe, and to move eight individuals from Nagoya to Detroit, Mr. Deakin said.

It's not cheap. Air Partner, a London-based broker which is organizing cargo flights full of humanitarian supplies as well as passenger evacuations, says it costs about $500,000 to fly a 747 freighter with 205,000 pounds of cargo from North Carolina to Tokyo. An MD-11 freighter traveling to Osaka to New Jersey with 192,000 pounds of freight costs $435,000. "It's expensive now, only because of the price of fuel," says Michael Gellert, Air Partner's director of cargo. "I don't see any carriers gouging."

But such charter flights are taking a back seat to commercial and military flights when it comes to obtaining jet fuel at the Tokyo airports. Problems with the fuel lines running to those airports has limited supplies, aviation experts said. So the charter flights must land elsewhere and top of their tanks, and then arrive and depart from Tokyo without taking on additional fuel. "Fuel is certainly an issue at Narita," said Mr. Gellert.

The big U.S. commercial airlines that fly into Tokyo said they aren't experiencing any fueling problems, but they also are making contingency plans. And for now, they said they aren't planning to make extra flights to Japan to aid in the exodus.

The U.S. State Department said it is working to facilitate the departure of private American citizens within a 50-mile radius of the stricken nuclear reactors. It also approved the voluntary departure of family members of its diplomatic staff in Tokyo, Nagoya and Yokohama. The government is paying for the relocations, most of which are on commercial flights but some also involved chartered aircraft.

Telecom equipment supplier  Telefon AB L.M. Ericsson
ERIC


-1.42
%




 said Thursday it had temporarily moved around 300 international employees and family members out of Japan. On Tuesday, it was only giving staff the option to leave. The company has 892 employees in Japan including local staff.

  France Télécom has helped its expatriate staff relocate either to the south or abroad. The group has around 80 employees at a research lab in Tokyo, 10 of them foreigners, all of whom have now left Tokyo.

The French government asked Air France to make more seats available on flights from Japan. 

Airlines, meanwhile, continued to juggle the risk to crews with the need to maintain service.  British Airways
ICAGY


0.19
%




 Thursday became the latest airline to shift its air-crew rest periods out of Tokyo.

It followed  Deutsche Lufthansa AG
DLAKY


0.52
%




, which pulled out crews and even stopped flights to Tokyo. Other airlines such as Singapore Airlines Ltd. and  Qantas Airways Ltd.
QAN


-0.28
%




 have made similar moves with their crews, aiming to keep them away from radiation risk and ensure better rest than is possible among Tokyo's aftershocks and power outages.

Union officials representing pilots at  United Continental Holdings Inc.
UAL


0.55
%




 have asked the airline to allow pilots to spend rest periods farther away from the Daiichi nuclear plant than Tokyo. Virgin Atlantic continued to base crew in Tokyo.

A number of companies are moving foreign and local staff to points west and south. Swedish fast-fashion retailer  Hennes & Mauritz,
HMB


0.03
%




 said it is temporarily relocating its national headquarters from Tokyo to Osaka. The retailer prepared to close stores in the Kanto area, home to Tokyo, with no word on when they might reopen.

Hotels said rooms in Osaka were filling up, and owners of office space were scrambling to get facilities ready for new clients.

  Starwood Hotels & Resorts
HOT


0.29
%




 said its hotels in southern Japan are seeing high occupancy as businesses relocate there. The company's Tokyo hotels are giving employees the option of staying home or working and living at the hotels. The hotels have evacuation and shelter plans ready in the event of a radiological threat to the city.

  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.75
%




 has minimized the number of employees who need to work on-site at its Tokyo office, cutting back to only key staff, a spokesman said. Other employees were free to work from home or leave Tokyo. The auto maker hasn't evacuated any staff thus far, the spokesman said, but is "evaluating contingencies if the situation deteriorates." The company has 200 employees in Tokyo.

Advertising giant  WPP PLC said it, too, has yet to repatriate staff from Japan, where it has around 4,600 employees, mainly based in Tokyo. 

Local units are making individual decisions talking to clients and staff about the current situation, the company said.

WPP Japan represents around 5% of total revenue and around 1.5% excluding associates. "As such, the impact is limited, despite the tragedy. Whilst the situation in Japan is very troubling, as far as business risk is concerned, the situation in the Middle East is probably more serious given this unpredictability," CEO Sir  Martin Sorrell said in a statement.

  Google Inc. said it was keeping the same approach in place since the beginning of the week: The company will support employee decisions, whether they choose to stay in Tokyo or leave, but there were no definite company-wide plans for employees to evacuate. The company has a few hundred employees in Tokyo.

  Tupperware Brands Corp.
TUP


-0.85
%




, which has about 20,000 sales people in Japan, made plans on the second day of the crisis to relocate all of its Tokyo-based employees and their immediate families to housing near the company's facilities in Okazaki, a city in southern Japan.

—Gustav Sandstrom and Alexandra Berzon contributed to this article 

 Write to  Susan Carey at susan.carey@wsj.com, Thomas M. Burton at tom.burton@wsj.com and Kenneth Maxwell at kenneth.maxwell@dowjones.com 