The Rangers haven't scored more than two goals in regulation in any of their past nine games. They've lost three of the past four games and have only one power-play goal in their past 13 games.

Their major problem? The person thought to be a constant on this Rangers team: star scorer Marian Gaborik.

Along with the rest of the Blueshirts' offense, Mr. Gaborik has sputtered recently. Mr. Gaborik in particular hit a new low over the weekend. He was benched in the second period of the Rangers' loss to the Flyers after seeing only 12:45 of ice time. He hasn't scored a goal in eight games—this after exploding for 42 goals in his first year as a Ranger last season.

"We need production, I'll leave it at that," Rangers coach John Tortorella said in a tension-filled news conference on Sunday night. "We've got guys grinding their butt off. We need some of our skill guys to score a goal for us."

Mr. Gaborik's production has come in spurts. He has 11 goals, six of which came on hat tricks in blowouts.

"Obviously I haven't produced much lately," Mr. Gaborik said. "I'm not giving up. I've just got to work harder, just try to get out of it. That's the bottom line. Confidence is a very big part."

Mr. Gaborik said he will use the benching as motivation in much the same way he did after being benched by Mr. Tortorella in a game against the Atlanta Thrashers in January 2010. 

Partly because of Mr. Gaborik's struggles, the Rangers are 15th in the league in scoring with 2.74 goals per game. They are particularly poor on the power play, ranking 23rd in the league, scoring on 15% of their opportunities.

Derek Stepan, the rookie center who is second on the team with 27 points, said the team has been "too cute" on the power play and has struggled to get off any shots at all, not to mention quality shots. 

Winger Brandon Dubinsky, who leads the team in points with 38, said the team "isn't battling hard enough" on the power play.

"I have to start putting the puck in the net more. That is why I get 21 minutes a game and why I'm on the power play," Mr. Dubinsky said.

The Rangers, who play host to the Maple Leafs Wednesday night, are still sixth in the Eastern Conference with 55 points. They have masked their offensive woes with strong performances from their goaltenders. Henrik Lundqvist and Martin Biron are allowing 2.43 goals per game, sixth-best in the league.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 