BANGKOK—The Bank of Thailand raised its benchmark interest rate for a third straight time Wednesday and signaled it will continue raising rates as it battles to curb rising inflationary pressures. 

The central bank's Monetary Policy Committee lifted the benchmark rate by a quarter of a percentage point to 2.5%. The Bank of Thailand has raised rates by 1.25 percentage points since it started the tightening cycle in July. Thailand joins other Asian nations in trying to fight inflation amid strong economic growth; rising prices for food, energy and other materials; and inflows of foreign capital. 

Bank of Thailand Assistant Governor Paiboon Kittisrikangwan said that pressure on headline and core inflation will continue to rise and that negative real interest rates—currently around minus 1%—remain a concern. Negative real interest rates result when the rate of inflation exceeds interest rates, reducing the value of household savings. 

"The real rate is expected to be in the negative territory for another meeting or two," he said. 

He said the committee discussed the possibility of raising the rate by more than a quarter percentage point, but the policy committee "assessed that gradual normalization of the policy rate remains appropriate for anchoring inflationary expectations and reducing the risk of financial imbalances in the economy." 

The decision to raise the rate by one-quarter of a point was unanimous. 

"The central bank's statement today is hawkish, so we believe they [the BOT] will continue the rate hikes. We expect the rate at 3% by the end of this year," said Standard Chartered Bank (Thai) senior economist Usara Wilaipich. 

She said price pressures will escalate in the second half when the government's cost-of-living aid measures expire in June and the diesel-price subsidy is removed, raising production costs. The government subsidizes the diesel price in a bid to maintain its price below 30 Thai baht (about $0.99) a liter to keep inflation in check. 

  Charl Kengchon, managing director of Kasikorn Research, the research unit of Kaikornabank PCL, said the central bank is expected to raise its policy rate to 3.25% by year end. 

Thailand is among several Asian nations battling higher prices as the economy continues to deliver healthy growth following the global recession in 2009, while commodity prices remain on an upward trend. Thailand's consumer price index rose 2.87% in February from a year earlier, compared with a 3.03% increase in January. Core CPI, which excludes volatile energy and food prices, rose 1.45% in February from a year earlier, still within the central bank's target increase of 0.5% to 3%. 

The central bank also raised its 2011 headline inflation forecast by 0.5 percentage point to 3%-5% to take into account rising price pressures, Mr. Paiboon said. The bank's core inflation projection remains unchanged at 2%-3%. 

The Bank of Thailand said it will continue to monitor inflationary pressure and is ready to take any necessary action. "In the third and fourth quarters, we could see the acceleration of inflation more explicitly," said Mr. Paiboon. 

After Wednesday's increase, core inflation should be kept within the target range, he said. Although risks remain that core inflation might exceed the target range, it should be within a manageable level, he said. 

He said some policy committee members expressed concern that the government may introduce more stimulus measures ahead of the upcoming election, which could boost future price pressures. 

Still, Mr. Paiboon said the committee believes the recent rises in oil and commodity prices are likely to be temporary and shouldn't weigh substantially on domestic and global economic growth prospects. 

"Unless political unrest in the Middle East becomes widespread and affects global oil supply, the current spike in oil and commodity prices will not significantly impact the continuity of global recovery," the central bank said in a statement. 

—Oranan Paweewun and Piyarat Setthasiriphaiboon contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Phisanu Phromchanya at phisanu.phromchanya@dowjones.com 