U.S. stocks declined, led lower by telecommunication companies as investors mulled the impact of Verizon's expected launch of  Apple's
AAPL


-0.04
%




 iPhone and worries mounted over the health of the euro-zone economy. 

The Dow closed down 37.31 points, or 0.3%, at 11637.4. Weighing on the measure, DuPont fell 1.5% after agreeing to acquire Denmark's  Danisco, an enzyme and specialty-food-ingredients company, in a $6.3 billion deal. DuPont will pay $5.8 billion in cash and assume $500 million of Danisco net debt.



Among the Dow's handful of gainers,  Alcoa
AA


-0.46
%




 rose 0.4% ahead of its fourth-quarter earnings report after the market's close. 

The Nasdaq Composite edged up 4.63, or 0.2% to 2707.80. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index shed 1.75, or 0.1% to 1269.75. 

Telecommunications stocks led the S&P 500 lower in the wake of confirmation over the weekend that Verizon Wireless will officially announce Tuesday that it will carry Apple's iPhone, which initially had only been available on the  AT&T
T


0.69
%




 network.  Sprint Nextel
S


7.82
%




 sank 2.1% and AT&T shed 1.8%, while shares of  Verizon Communications
VZ


0.44
%




 edged down one cent.

Investors said Monday's pullback was a natural reaction after the market's climb in the last quarter of 2010 stretched into last week. Portfolio managers also are waiting for earnings reports to revise their outlooks and see which sectors are poised to do well in the new year.

"Earnings in the first half of the year should be pretty good. I'm concerned a little bit about the second half," said  Richard Sherry, portfolio manager at Kayne Anderson Rudnick Investment Management. "Companies have been doing a good job of managing costs, but as we go through the year it will become more difficult," as investors watch to see which companies are exhibiting growth, he said.

With no U.S. economic data on Monday, many market watchers focused on Europe. The euro touched a four-month low against the dollar after German media reported over the weekend that France and Germany were pressuring Portugal to accept an Ireland-type bailout package from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union. Officials in Germany and France denied the report, but fears grew that Portugal and Spain could follow Greece and Ireland in requesting financial aid from international lenders.

"There are real questions about Europe and the prospects for the European economy in 2011—particularly when Europe is a very important export destination for the U.S.," said  Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer of Hugh Johnson Advisors. "If Europe has another sinking spell, then everybody's going to have to revisit their forecasts for 2011," he said. 

The euro was trading recently at $1.2952, up from $1.2910 in New York late Friday, after dealers said the European Central Bank stepped in with "aggressive" purchases of bonds issued by high-debt governments.

Monday's market also took a hit from a sour reaction to a weekend of deal-making, including the DuPont deal.  Duke Energy
DUK


-0.74
%




 fell 1.2% after agreeing to acquire  Progress Energy
PGN


-0.99
%




 in an all-stock deal valued at about $13.7 billion, creating the country's largest utility. Shares of Progress Energy weakened 1.6%.



However,  Playboy Enterprises soared 17% after agreeing to be taken private by an entity controlled by its founder and controlling shareholder  Hugh Hefner in a deal valued at about $207.3 million, ending a month's long wrangling over the future of the media and entertainment company.

  Sara Lee rose 4.5% after private-equity firm Apollo Global Management and investor  C. Dean Metropoulos formed a group of investors to explore a buyout of the bread and cheesecake maker, The Wall Street Journal said, citing people familiar with the matter.

  Strayer Education
STRA


0.46
%




 plunged 23% as the for-profit college slashed its 2011 forecast after reporting that new-student enrollment for its winter term fell 20% from the prior year. Sterne Agee cut the company's stock-investment rating to "sell" from "neutral." Other for-profit education companies weakened, including  Corinthian Colleges, off 13%,  ITT Educational Services,
ESI


0.00
%




 down 13%, and  Capella Education,
CPLA


0.56
%




 which fell 20%.

  Microsoft
MSFT


0.18
%




 declined 1.3% after announcing  Robert Muglia, president of the software company's server and tools business, will leave this summer after Chief Executive  Steve Ballmer decided a change was needed.

Demand for U.S. Treasurys climbed, sending the yield on the 10-year note down to 3.28%.

Crude-oil prices rose above $89 a barrel, while gold futures edged higher. 

 Write to  Kristina Peterson at kristina.peterson@dowjones.com 