The race for the Republican presidential nomination is likely to be crowded with big names and familiar faces. And then there's Buddy.

Charles Elson "Buddy" Roemer III made a splash more than two decades ago in the Louisiana governor's race with his "slay the dragon" cry, defeating incumbent Edwin Edwards, a colorful populist snared in corruption investigations. Four years later, Mr. Roemer made an ignominious exit from the governor's mansion when, in a bid for re-election, he came in behind Mr. Edwards and David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan grand wizard.

Mr. Roemer, who switched from the Democratic to the Republican party while governor, made one more failed run in 1995, then retreated to the private sector, where he founded two community banks. 

Now he is back, making an improbable run at the 2012 GOP nomination for president. Mr. Roemer, who plays down his Harvard MBA in favor of a folksy, fresh-off-the-family-cotton-farm demeanor, impressed some political observers with a forceful speech at an Iowa candidate forum last week. His biggest applause line: a "declaration of independence" from special interests, punctuated by his pledge to take no political action committee money—and no donation at all greater than $100.

The other potential candidates, "they've got PACs and they've got airplanes," Mr. Roemer told the crowd. "All I've got is me and you. I think it's enough."

Mr. Roemer has gotten by before without big money. He served four terms in the House in the 1980s and was one of the few members of Congress to decline PAC money. He voluntarily set strict campaign-contribution limits during his successful run for governor in 1987. 

He portrays himself as a hard-nosed businessman who has the guts to tackle the deficit by slashing any program he deems ineffective. As if to prove he wouldn't be beholden to anyone, Mr. Roemer railed against ethanol subsidies in Iowa, a state full of corn farms.

And these days, the Internet has made it possible to raise huge sums by rousing an army of small-scale contributors. In his 2008 presidential campaign, Barack Obama raised more than $400 million from donors who gave $200 or less.

"He doesn't believe in the establishment anywhere you find it," said Elliott Stonecipher, a Louisiana political consultant who worked on Mr. Roemer's early campaigns. "I contend that his message is perfectly timed."

Veterans of Iowa politics are skeptical. Top potential contenders for the GOP nomination—including former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin and former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty—have raised millions through political action committees, giving them a head start in building campaigns.

Mr. Roemer "is not in the conversation here," said Craig Robinson, a political analyst and the former political director of the Iowa Republican Party. Most of the audience at the forum "didn't really know who he was."

Still, another analyst in attendance, Wes Enos, writing on an Iowa political website, called Mr. Roemer "one of the most interesting candidates of the night." Mr. Enos, said that while Mr. Roemer didn't have an electric connection with the Iowa crowd of about 1,000, "it's unfair and unwise to fully dismiss him."

Mr. Roemer, 67 years old, described himself at the forum as "a church-going Methodist boy" and added a fervent "thank you, Jesus" when he recounted meeting his third wife, a church pianist. But some of his past positions might give evangelical voters pause. As governor, he vetoed three bills that imposed tight limits on abortion, calling them unconstitutionally restrictive. He also greatly expanded gambling in the state.

Mr. Roemer talks proudly of his successes in Louisiana: overhauling campaign-finance laws, strengthening environmental protection, testing teachers for competency and balancing the state budget. But he also gained a reputation in the state as arrogant and aloof. "He wouldn't return calls. To anybody," said Foster Campbell, a Democrat who served in the state Senate during the Roemer administration.

Midway through his term, Mr. Roemer's second wife walked out with their son. The governor withdrew almost entirely from public view and sought counsel from a spiritual adviser who sounded New Age themes. When he reappeared to address legislators, the governor appealed to them to "light the campfire...gather 'round…feel the power of the tribal family.…"

Mr. Roemer doesn't talk much about those days now, except to say that he has "been knocked down a few times." In his view, that only makes him a more appealing candidate. "I want my president to be a real person," he said. "I want my president to have suffered and to have bounced back from that suffering. That's kind of who I am."

 Write to  Stephanie Simon at stephanie.simon@wsj.com and Jennifer Forsyth at jennifer.forsyth@wsj.com 