Almost exactly a year ago Mahamat-Saleh Haroun made history as the first African filmmaker to win a major prize in the main competition of the Cannes International Film Festival.

Nowhere was the impact of Mr. Haroun's Jury Prize-winning film "Un Homme Qui Crie" ("A Screaming Man") felt more keenly than in the director's native Chad, a landlocked country riven by 40 years of intermittent civil war.

Last January, Mr. Haroun attended the first screening of "A Screaming Man" in Chad's capital, N'Djamena, where he was born. The premier took place in the newly refurbished Le Normandie, where the 49-year-old director had watched his first Westerns and Bollywood movies as a child.

Like all of Chad's cinemas, Le Normandie had fallen into a state of severe disrepair after being abandoned more than 30 years ago. Its resurrection is part of a wider plan to create a national film industry. 

According to Mr. Haroun, Chad's first film school will open in 2013 and a law was recently voted by the government to tax mobile-phone calls. The extra money will be injected into the audiovisual sector. 

Claude Gilaizeau, who produced Mr. Haroun's early short films and his first feature, the docu-fiction "Bye Bye Africa" (1999), believes none of this would have been possible without the success of "A Screaming Man" at Cannes. "Haroun proved that films about Africa can touch audiences from all over the world," he says. "For the first time in a long while, Chadians had something they could actually cheer about and feel proud of."

Savoring a Montecristo cigar on the terrace of a Paris café, Mr. Haroun recalls his film's reception at Cannes. "We were given a 15-minute standing ovation, which left a lasting impression on the Chadian minister of culture, who had come over especially," he says. "Since then, things have begun to move forward."

"A Screaming Man," which debuted in France and the Netherlands last September and is opening in the U.K. today, is Mr. Haroun's fourth feature film to date. It is his most explicit denunciation yet of the Saharan country's continuing civil war and the way it is destroying ordinary, hard-working families.

It is also shot through with Mr. Haroun's characteristic irony. The main character, a swimming instructor at a hotel pool in N'Djamena, is nicknamed "Champion" because of earlier feats as an All-African swimming champion.

Played with a slow-burning intensity by nonprofessional actor Youssouf Djaoro, who also starred in Mr. Haroun's third film "Daratt" (2006), Champion proves less heroic than his name when he sacrifices his son's future for the sake of his cushy job. 

"What I would like is that spectators ask themselves what they might have done in Champion's position," says Mr. Haroun. "I think that when we are surrounded by violence, panic and fear, we don't always do what we should."

Mr. Haroun, whose buttoned-down appearance lends him a professorial air, took the title of his film from a line of verse by the famed Martinique poet Aimé Césaire, who wrote "a screaming man is not a dancing bear." 

"I feel that sometimes people's suffering and their unhappiness are made into a spectacle," says Mr. Haroun. "We can be sitting, eating our dinner in front of the evening news and watch people dying in the street as though we are watching a play or at the opera. Like Césaire, I believe people should get involved and not be indifferent to what's going on around them."

A central themes of Mr. Haroun's films is the lack of male responsibility within African society. One of Mr. Haroun's early shorts is about a young man who contracts AIDS but waits before disclosing it to his fiancée; his second film "Abouna" is about two brothers whose father abandons them and their mother without providing any explanation; in "A Screaming Man," Champion also fails to live up to his responsibility as a father.

"For me, someone irresponsible is someone who when you ask them a straight question does not answer you," says Mr. Haroun. "This is something which is very common in certain African cultures and societies, where the reply is never 'no.' Instead people keep quiet and don't reply. In my films, I try to pierce the truth behind this stubborn silence."

Indeed, the tragic irony of Mr. Haroun's so-called "screaming man" is that his emotions are so pent up he cannot let them out. "Silence is often borne out of war," notes Mr. Haroun. "After a while, reaction seems pointless."

At the age of 19, Mr. Haroun had his own brush with mortality when he was hit in the leg by a stray bullet. 

"My father had to push me in a wheelbarrow because I couldn't walk," recalls Mr. Haroun. "We left N'Djamena and crossed the river into Cameroon."

After that Mr. Haroun's father, a diplomat, and his mother moved to Beijing. Mr. Haroun joined them after recovering from his injury. But his dream of studying cinema in China was thwarted by the country's Communist hard-line, which precluded any foreigners from studying at the national film institute.

Instead, Mr. Haroun moved to Paris, where he did his film studies, supporting himself as a journalist until he shot his first feature, a mixture of documentary and fiction, titled "Bye Bye Africa."

Mr. Haroun first began thinking about "A Screaming Man" while he was shooting "Daratt" in N'Djamena in April 2006. The Chadian rebels attacked the city and the shoot had to be stopped for several days. Two years later, Mr. Haroun was shooting a short film "Expectations" in the capital when the same thing happened again. 

"There were three days of bloody shooting and I thought 'I have to let people know what has been happening,'" he says.

As one of only two fully fledged Chadian directors (the other being close friend Issa Serge Coelo), Mr. Haroun feels his own weight of responsibility as a filmmaker. 

"I think cinema should be more than just about entertaining people so that they can forget their problems," he says. "It should also be a way of reflecting about how we live our lives. I want to send out a universal message about the problems African people have to face. I don't think any truth is too bad to reveal."

 Write to  Tobias Grey at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 