WASHINGTON—U.S. government revenue grew in April, but its budget deficit kept widening on mounting interest payments and entitlement spending. 

The U.S. spent $40.49 billion more than it collected last month, a Treasury Department report said Wednesday. 

The monthly deficit was smaller than April 2010's shortfall of $82.69 billion. Tax refunds last month fell while non-withheld tax receipts climbed. 

Still, the deficit was the 31st monthly shortfall in a row. With nine months of fiscal 2011 elapsed, the government has spent $869.90 billion more than it has collected—higher than $799.68 billion for the same period a year earlier. 

"We expect that as the labor market improves further throughout this year, the increases in jobs will maintain the growth in individual income tax revenues," Barclays Capital economist Theresa Chen said in a note to clients. "However, the spending side of the fiscal balance remains precarious. We look for spending to increase at a gradual pace throughout the rest of this year." 

The government's fiscal years begin Oct. 1. So far in fiscal 2011, the U.S. has collected $1.31 trillion and spent $2.18 trillion. 

Outlays have gone up compared to last year for Social Security and Medicare, Treasury's budget statement said. 

Net interest payments on the ballooning public debt have also climbed this year. 

The overspending is pushing up the debt, and the government is nearing its $14.3 trillion borrowing limit. The U.S. Treasury has asked Congress to raise the ceiling, but House Speaker John Boehner, (R., Ohio), said this week there would be no debt-limit increase without significant spending cuts. 

The Obama administration has projected the country will run a $1.65 trillion deficit in 2011. That would be the biggest shortfall in U.S. history. The 2010 deficit was $1.29 trillion. 

Treasury officials have said continued improvement in the economy will restrain deficits in the near term but that significant fiscal policy changes will be required later on. 

 Write to  Jeff Bater at jeff.bater@dowjones.com 