 Rescue workers struggled to get food and water to Japan's ravaged northern communities as the impact of Friday's quake continued to ripple throughout the nation, raising new fears about its nuclear facilities, shaking its financial markets and bringing big chunks of its economy to a halt.  

The official death toll continued to climb, reaching above 1,800 by Monday afternoon, though the total was expected to rise by hundreds if not thousands as reports from the most stricken areas trickled in. National broadcaster NHK reported that more than 450,000 people had moved to temporary shelters in the affected areas. 

U.S. military forces stepped up relief activities in support of efforts to cope with the humanitarian crisis.

 Makeshift morgues have cropped up all along the devastated northeastern coastline to hold victims found in the subsiding floodwaters. 

 Japan's unfolding nuclear crisis deepened at a stricken power plant, after overheating in one reactor may have led to a dangerous melting of nuclear fuels and an explosion that hindered efforts to cool two others. 

 Japan's benchmark Nikkei Stock Average dropped 6.2%, to close at 9620.49—its sharpest single-day percentage loss since December 2008, while the Topix index of all the Tokyo Stock Exchange First Section issues slid 7.5% to 846.96, for its heaviest loss since October 2008. 

To prevent a cash crunch, the Bank of Japan conducted a stream of operations throughout the day, ultimately offering to inject 22 trillion yen, or about $269 billion, into short-term money markets. It also doubled the size of its asset-purchase program.

Anger is mounting at Tokyo Electric Power, not just over the precarious nuclear situation, but also over its mismanagement of a series of planned blackouts in the country that caused mass confusion and delays in the daily commute for many heading for work.

 Tokyoites went back to work as the city tried to edge back to a semblance of normalcy. At least, some did: with energy saving a major concern, some firms remained closed and told workers to stay at home. 

Japan's car companies halted production through Wednesday, with Honda saying it would stop making cars domestically until Sunday, as they grappled with damaged plants, broken supply chains and transportation glitches.

Other companies from electronics giant Hitachi to department store Isetan Mitsukoshi Holdings said they'd closed stores or suspended operations as well.

Most developed economies will continue to grow at a "robust" pace in the months ahead, but Italy, China and India may be heading for a slowdown, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development's composite leading indicator. 

 Lawyers for the European Union's executive arm are studying EU treaty law to determine whether it has the right to set up an EU-wide board to review strategic investments in the 27-nation bloc, an internal letter said. 

Euro-zone industrial output rose steadily in January as growth in France helped offset weakness in Germany and Italy, while initial estimates of a drop in December were revised to show a modest increase.

 Euro-zone finance ministers debated how they could enlarge the bloc's bailout funds, following the dictates of a pact sealed by national leaders, but reached no agreement and put off further discussions to next week.  

Ireland's government wants more time to fix its banking system, and the involvement of the European Financial Stability Facility in limiting the impact on its own finances. 

Police in Scotland charged a 30-year-old man with terrorism offenses after arresting him on suspicion of aiding a suicide bomber who targeted Christmas shoppers in Stockholm. 

 German Chancellor Angela Merkel suspended a plan to extend the lives of Germany's 17 nuclear plants, saying the government would lead an extensive review of their safety and the country's atomic-energy policy. 

Russia may delay a key element of its planned $35 billion in state assets sales, a government minister said, as dramatically higher oil prices shrink the budget deficit and reduce fiscal pressure. 

A former presidential candidate in Belarus said he fled the country to escape its secret police, as Human Rights Watch strongly condemned its post-election crackdown.

Ales Mikhalevich said he is in a safe location abroad, as Human Rights Watch released a 31-page report documenting persecution of opposition candidates and activists, abuse of detainees, trials behind closed doors, raids on rights groups and pressure on families and lawyers.

 Advisers to President Barack Obama are telling potential donors that he is in a weaker position heading into the 2012 election than he was in 2008 and are previewing specific criticisms of likely opponents. 

 As gasoline prices surge, U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke is changing his tune when discussing inflation in public—in part to avert criticism that central bankers are out of touch with consumers. 

 Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao rejected comparisons between China and Mideast countries rocked by political upheavals, but he nevertheless made a fresh call for gradual political reforms, saying citizens should be free to criticize and supervise their government.  

The Indian navy captured 61 pirates who jumped into the Arabian Sea to flee a gunfight and fire on the hijacked ship from which they had staged several attacks. Two Indian navy ships also rescued 13 crew members from the fishing boat Sunday night, nearly 1,100 kilometers off Kochi in southern India. 

 A Pakistan high court backed off from deciding whether a U.S. Central Intelligence Agency contractor held for killing two armed men is covered by diplomatic immunity, saying that a separate court hearing a murder case against the contractor would rule on the issue.  

In Iraq, a suicide bomber blew up his booby-tapped car outside an army battalion headquarters in the country's east, killing at least 10 soldiers and wounding 29 people in a bombing that brought down the building. An army commander in Diyala described a horrific scene of the building collapsing on soldiers inside.

 In Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and other Arab states in the Persian Gulf dispatched troops to help quell violent antigovernment protests in the tiny island nation, the first cross-border deployment of Arab troops since a revolt in Tunisia in December sparked unrest across the Arab world. 

More than 1,000 Saudi soldiers entered Bahrain as part of a larger force drawn from the Gulf Cooperation Council states, in a sign of growing alarm over the uprising threatening the ruling Al Khalifa family. The ultimate size of the force hasn't been revealed, but the United Arab Emirates has also said its troops are taking part.

 Forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi pressed their offensive further into eastern Libya, with reports of warplane strikes in the rebel-held city of Ajdabiya and a push on the ground toward the rebels' de facto capital city of Benghazi. 

The battlefield developments lent urgency to efforts by international governments to stop Gadhafi, including the adoption of a no-fly zone among other options.

France and Britain reiterated calls for other world powers to isolate Libya's leader Gadhafi with a no-fly zone, amid diplomatic differences over how much backing to give Libyan rebels.

In Niger, veteran opposition leader Mahamadou Issoufou won the presidential run-off election, according to final provisional results announced by the electoral commission. Saturday's poll was meant to return the country to civilian rule more than a year after soldiers ousted the country's former president in a coup. 

 Fighters aligned with Ivory Coast's President-elect Alassane Ouattara pushed into strongholds of Laurent Gbagbo, the incumbent who has resisted diplomatic efforts to dislodge him, signaling a violent new phase in the monthslong saga over a disputed election.  