DUBAI—Omani protesters in the town of Sohar where at least one person was killed Sunday, said they wouldn't give up their demands for better pay and working prospects despite some modest government concessions.



On Monday, in the third consecutive day of unrest, striking workers and unemployed protesters blocked major entrances to the north Omani industrial town, home to a major port and aluminium refinery. Europeans who work in the port zone said many businesses were closed by the strike, and some expatriate staff evacuated to the United Arab Emirates an hour's drive away.

Earlier, a crowd of demonstrators set fire to a supermarket, according to Associated Press, in rare show of violence in protests that have flared here and in Salalah in the south of the country.

"We want better pay and more jobs," said a young English graduate near the main junction for Sohar's industrial port.

The protests appear to be gaining momentum, although the government isn't considered to be in danger of falling.

At the large traffic roundabout leading to Sohar, hundreds of Omanis in national dress of turbans and robes held a protest vigil. A protest leader addressing the crowd laid out demands for jobs, pay and more-sweeping cabinet changes. However, he prompted the biggest cheer—and a waving of Omani flags—when he added remarks supportive of the country's ruler, Sultan Qaboos bin Said Al Said.

"The regime at the moment is a step behind what the people want," said Marc Valeri, lecturer in political economy at the Institute of Arab and Islamic Studies at the University of Exeter. "The protesters at the moment don't consider the gestures made since last week [to be] satisfactory."

Track events day by day.

Sultan Qaboos's changes have included switching six ministers, including the civil service, education, and commerce and industry portfolios, raising the minimum wage by 40% and increasing student grants. 

The former commerce and industry minister, Maqbool bin Ali bin Sultan, is a member of a large business family, which Mr. Valeri said caused resentment among some Omanis. He has now been given the transport and communications brief. 

Sultan Qaboos also ordered the government to employ 50,000 people and to bring members of the Majlis al-Shura advisory body, which is partly elected, into the cabinet. 

"In Oman, the challenge is not really to the Sultan or the regime," said Mustafa Alani, director of security studies at the Gulf Research Center in Dubai. "Last week the protesters were shouting 'long live the Sultan', but they think there are some corrupt officials."

Sultan Qaboos has transformed Oman since ascending to power in 1970, when the gates to the capital, Muscat, were locked every evening. It now has a young and comparatively well-educated population, but is relatively less wealthy than fellow members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait or the UAE.

"There's a frustration among the young educated population who can't get what their fathers and mothers got in the late 1970s and 1980s in terms of state welfare and public jobs," Mr. Valeri said. "For people in their twenties and thirties who are educated but can't find a job, the Sultan's achievements of the past 40 years don't count for much."