  Eike Batista's conglomerate will invest as much as $40 million a day to meet growing demand for Brazilian commodities and manufactured goods in the coming years. 

The 54-year-old Brazilian entrepreneur said Monday in an interview that he plans to create a new shipping company, purchase a firm in the automation industry and partner with large global manufacturers in Brazil, among other initiatives. 

Mr. Batista's plans could have a significant impact on a country that is growing fast but has serious infrastructure inadequacies. The company, which is invested in oil and gas, electric power, mining, logistics and real estate, is rapidly increasing its investments from about $20 million per day currently as demand for Brazilian raw materials—notably from China—rises. 

A good portion of holding company  EBX Brasil SA
OSXRY


0.00
%




's investments is going to Porto do Acu, a massive port facility being built by his LLX Logistica SA in Rio de Janeiro state. Besides the port itself, which is projected to accommodate the world's biggest ships when it opens in 2012, the complex also includes a power plant, a steel mill and a car-making plant, among other businesses. 

Mr. Batista said a deal should be announced by June or July with a "European or Japanese" car maker to build a plant in Porto do Acu. 

"You will have perfect logistics," he said, in reference to the proximity between the port and factories in the integrated complex. The planned auto making plant "will save $500 per car made in Acu," vs. producing cars anywhere else in Brazil, he said. Mr. Batista said wasn't ready to announce the car maker's name. 

Mr. Batista also said he plans to create a new shipping company to deliver goods overseas, with a goal of profiting on the global demand for Brazilian commodities and other products. He declined to give details. 

  General Electric Co.
GE


0.24
%




 is also expected to take a site within Porto do Acu, where it will make equipment for the oil industry, which is growing rapidly due to massive discoveries along the Brazilian shoreline, said Mr. Batista. He added that a deal should be signed when U.S. President Barack Obama visits Brazil later this week. 

A GE spokesman said the company couldn't comment on such plans until after President Obama's visit. 

Mr. Batista said EBX already has a full portfolio of businesses. However, the company is interested in acquiring a supplier of automation services in Brazil. His companies spend "a lot of money" with contractors for automation services, so he thinks it could be better to acquire one such supplier, but declined to give more details. 

Mr. Batista also said he plans to carry out initial public offerings for two additional business units: gold miner AUX and copper concern CUX. He didn't provide a timetable for taking AUX and CUX to the markets, but said it should happen in the next few months. In February, AUX announced a deal to buy around 80% of Canadian gold miner  Ventana Gold Corp., in a deal that values the company at about $1.5 billion. 

EBX, along with five of its operating units, already trade publicly. 

Despite an aggressive investment push, Mr. Batista says his companies now have "less than five billion Brazilian reais", or roughly $3 billion, in debt. For future investment, such as one of 3.5 billion reals in an iron ore mine announced in February, he said funding is already provided for with several banks. "We are not going to the [public debt] market", he said. 

Mr. Batista also said he doesn't want to allow other shareholders to get more than 20% in any of his companies. Some partners, like China's Wuhan Iron and Steel, which has a 17% stake in his  MMX Mineracao e Metalicos SA,
MMXM3


-2.27
%




 are close to that mark, but the executive said he is not willing to reduce his own holdings by letting others get too big a stake in his business. 

With an eye on the 2014 World Cup and 2016 Olympics, both to be held in Brazil, Mr. Batista is also building hotels in Rio. But he fears Brazil's infrastructure is not yet up to the task of holding such big events. "I don't like the timing", he said, adding that the country is "squeezed." However, he said Brazilian construction companies will eventually get the infrastructure in place. 