Former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty on Monday formed a presidential exploratory committee, taking a formal step toward a campaign for the White House that could prompt other Republicans to declare their intentions.

Mr. Pawlenty, 50 years old, announced his committee in a video posted on his Facebook page. The two-minute video highlighted his blue-collar roots, combining images of American decline, such as foreclosure signs and shuttered factories, with pictures of Mr. Pawlenty talking to a range of Americans.

Until now, the major potential GOP candidates have been hiring staff and giving speeches, but they have been unable to raise money directly for the purpose of building a presidential campaign. By forming an exploratory committee, Mr. Pawlenty can raise money to spend toward a campaign, but under less-stringent regulations than apply to a formal candidacy.



Other Republicans eyeing the chance to challenge President Barack Obama in 2012 have taken steps to prepare for campaign announcements. Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich announced plans to form an exploratory committee, likely in May. Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour is scheduled to visit Nevada on Tuesday, traveled last week to Iowa and has hired staff in New Hampshire. All three states play early roles in the GOP nominating process. 

While many GOP strategists consider Mr. Pawlenty a serious contender, he remains largely unknown outside Minnesota. Most polls show his support in the low single digits nationally, far behind Mike Huckabee and Mitt Romney—the former governors of Arkansas and Massachusetts, respectively—and behind former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin and Mr. Gingrich.

Supporters of Mr. Pawlenty argue his low name recognition could be an advantage, giving him a chance to define himself in the eyes of Republican primary voters. By contrast, they say, the public images of some other potential contenders, such as Mr. Gingrich and Ms. Palin, are more settled. 

Mr. Pawlenty's announcement came as little surprise, as he has made frequent visits to the early primary states and has been a regular speaker at Republican forums featuring potential presidential candidates.

"He's sort of the tortoise in the race," said Doug Gross, Mr. Romney's state chairman in Iowa in 2008, who isn't affiliated with any of the campaigns. "Instead of trying to ride the wave of Fox News and be famous and pop in and out of the state, he's on the ground doing all the hard work necessary to do well in the caucus."

Mr. Pawlenty, whose father was a truck driver and mother died when he was 16, plans to highlight his up-from-the-bootstraps biography as he tries to connect with voters who feel disenfranchised by Washington.

In his memoir, "Courage to Stand," Mr. Pawlenty writes wistfully about his hometown, South St. Paul, Minn., before the meat-packing plants closed and put people out of work. He was the first in his family to graduate from college and covered his tuition by working at a supermarket. He also dedicates a short chapter to his love of hockey—and hockey fights.



Mr. Pawlenty has cast himself as a leader willing to do the tough work of bringing deficits under control, even if that means retooling popular programs such as Medicare and Social Security. In interviews, he has been open to the idea of limiting Social Security benefits for wealthier Americans. With many GOP governors now locking horns with public-employee unions, Mr. Pawlenty hails a long transit strike that led to compensation cuts for Twin Cities bus drivers. 

His résumé carries several potential liabilities. He was an advocate for reducing greenhouse-gas emissions, a possible problem for GOP voters, but one shared by some other potential candidates. He also backed a regional cap on carbon emissions. He has since called that position a mistake.

Shortly after Mr. Pawlenty's term as governor ended, the state budget office projected that Minnesota's deficit for the two-year 2012-2013 budget period would exceed $5 billion. That put it among the 10 highest in the U.S. as a percentage of spending, according to the left-leaning Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.

Mr. Pawlenty has been reaching out to Christian conservatives in Iowa and elsewhere. On a Monday conference call with supporters, Mr. Pawlenty's wife, Mary, quoted from "The Purpose Driven Life," the best-seller on Christian values, according to someone on the call.

 Write to  Patrick O'Connor at patrick.oconnor@wsj.com 