The Treasury Department's profitable sale of its stake in  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.67
%




 bodes well for taxpayers as the government gears up for even bigger challenges related to its bailout of the financial system. 

Last year, the Treasury Department sold its 34% stake in Citigroup, dribbling out bits of its holdings to earn a $12 billion profit. The Treasury hopes to employ some of the lessons learned with Citigroup when it sells stakes later this year of  Ally Financial Inc. and  American International Group Inc.,
AIG


0.30
%




 in which the government owns 74% and 92%, respectively. 

Beyond the size of the government stake, the Treasury considers several factors—down to details such as daily trading activity—when planning an asset sale, and it is unlikely the design would be identical for any two transactions. 

"We're looking at all those factors to come up with a plan that protects the taxpayer investment, gets market pricing for the asset and gets the sale done in a timely way," said  David Miller, chief investment officer at the Treasury Department's Office of Financial Stability. 

The outcome of these sales will affect the state of the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the controversial rescue plan enacted in the waning days of the Bush administration. Profits on multibillion-dollar transactions will offset losses elsewhere in the TARP. 

The giant size of the stakes complicates the Treasury's task. There is risk in offering more shares than the market can absorb. Conversely, there is risk in prolonging the process by selling too few. The Citigroup approach illustrates the process. 

Between April and December, the Treasury used a combination of daily stock sales and a secondary offering at the end of the period to move its 7.7 billion shares of Citigroup. Its daily sales made up about 7% of daily volume in Citigroup shares, a threshold other investors were able to absorb without major disruptions to the price. 

A year ago, the Treasury was under assault from lawmakers for investing $47.5 billion in AIG preferred shares, a deal that made sure other banks were paid for contracts held with the insurer. The Treasury's preferred shares are expected to convert into common stock this spring that would be worth about $76.5 billion at AIG's current market price. 

At midday Wednesday, AIG shares were trading at $59.73. 

Extracting the profit, however, won't be easy. The Treasury will convert its investment into 1.65 billion shares of AIG, more than 12 times the number of common shares currently outstanding. It would take the government nearly eight years to sell its AIG stake if the Treasury accounted for roughly 7% of daily volume, the threshold used in the Citigroup sale. 

With AIG, the Treasury will probably sell some of its shares in a secondary offering, according to people familiar with the Treasury's thinking. After that, the Treasury could pursue daily sales and maybe another secondary offering with the hopes of selling the entire stake within a year, these people said. 

There is precedent for that approach. The Treasury whittled its stake in  General Motors
GM


0.28
%




 to 26% of outstanding shares from more than 60% in the car maker's November initial public offering. 

Selling stock in initial and secondary offerings might even generate a better return for taxpayers. In a study published last month,  Linus Wilson, a finance professor at the University of Louisiana, found that shares of Citigroup displayed a weak but significant decrease in price when the dribble-out sales began and a small but significant increase in price when the sales ended. 

 Write to  Steven D. Jones at steve-d.jones@dowjones.com 