The trade itself was barely worth a headline. On Dec. 27, the Mets acquired infielder Chin-lung Hu from the Los Angeles Dodgers in exchange for a minor-league pitcher named Mike Antonini. But in an offseason devoid of marquee deals, this one seemed entirely fitting.

"The Mets traded for who?"

"Hu."

"Who?"

"Yes."

"I'm confused."

"He's a utility infielder."

"Who?"

"Hu!"

No, Hu is not on first. But he may play a little at second, in addition to backing up Jose Reyes at shortstop. He is also the first Taiwanese player in team history. And that was reason enough for the Mets to introduce him at a news conference Wednesday at Citi Field.

Normally, such affairs are reserved for notable acquisitions. Think Jason Bay in 2010 and Francisco Rodriguez in late 2008. But the fact that the Mets play in Flushing, home to many Taiwanese immigrants, made Mr. Hu an exception.

Chinese journalists outnumbered reporters from mainstream American news outlets. And two local elected officials attended: Councilman Peter Koo, a Chinese immigrant; and Assemblymember Grace Meng, who represents Flushing.

All the attention prompted Mets general manager Sandy Alderson to stress repeatedly while standing at the podium that the trade was made for baseball reasons.

"I didn't want Chin-lung to think that he had been brought in here for reasons other than his own ability and our sense that he can contribute to the team," Mr. Alderson said later. 

"I think it's great that he represents a significant part of the community here. I certainly would not say that that had no impact whatsoever, but ultimately this was a baseball decision. I just wanted him to know that."

Mr. Hu, 26, was signed by the Dodgers in 2003 and at one point was a highly regarded prospect. He was named MVP of the 2007 Futures Game. But while he proved adept as a defensive replacement, he struggled to hit major-league pitching. In 96 games with the Dodgers from 2007 to 2010, he hit just .191.

The Mets needed infield depth, though, in case of an injury to Mr. Reyes. And they didn't have to give up much. Mr. Antonini had a 4.49 ERA in the minors last season.

Mr. Hu has ties to both Paul DePodesta, the Mets' head of player development, and manager Terry Collins. Mr. DePodesta was general manager of the Dodgers when Mr. Hu was a prospect there and Mr. Collins was their minor-league field coordinator.

"He was with me for two years," Mr. Hu said of Mr. Collins. "He's a great coach. Everybody was scared of him.…He's a disciplinarian, but he's good."

Once, when the Dodgers were in New York to play the Mets, Mr. Hu said he visited Flushing and felt at home. 

"It's just like Taiwan," he said. "A lot of great Chinese food."

According to 2009 data from the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey, there are roughly 22,000 people born in Taiwan living in New York City. And nearly 15,000 of them live in Queens.

Mr. Hu is one of only six Taiwanese-born players to have made it to the majors. Former Yankees pitcher Chien-Ming Wang, now with the Washington Nationals, is the most prominent of the bunch. Mr. Hu has the most career plate appearances (191).

His presence does little to excite the bulk of the Mets' fan base, but the Mets never set out to make a splashy acquisition this winter. With limited payroll flexibility, they sought to fill holes with low-risk, low-dollar deals that wouldn't hamper their ability to spend next winter.

The result: They signed pitchers Chris Capuano, Chris Young and D.J. Carrasco, catcher Ronny Paulino, outfielder Willie Harris and signed a handful of other players on minor-league deals. And they traded for Mr. Hu.

"We've been able to address all of our needs," Mr. Alderson said. "Hopefully we've addressed those needs well. We'll find out in spring training and early in the season. Given what latitude we had, I'm actually happy with what we have."

The Mets have yet to settle with two players who filed for salary arbitration: pitcher R.A. Dickey and outfielder Angel Pagan.

 Those cases will go to hearings if agreements are not reached by the end of the month, but Mr. Alderson said he was optimistic that both players could be signed before then.

Mr. Alderson said he had dinner with his predecessor, Omar Minaya, earlier this month to talk about a possible role for him within the organization, but they have not spoken since.

"Coming back to the organization will involve a certain adjustment from his standpoint, psychologically, emotionally," Mr. Alderson said.

 "I don't think you should read anything into what's happened so far. I think this is just what happens when there's a transition. I think we have to give people some space to figure out what they want to do."