LONDON—Given the still high levels of indebtedness in the global economy, a rise in long-term interest rates could have "severe" consequences, Bank of England Governor  Mervyn King said Monday. 

Speaking to members of the European parliament, Mr. King said that while banks and other financial institutions have cut their debts, government debt has risen, as have the debts of consumers and businesses in some countries. Raising interest rates would make it more expensive to meet payments on those debts, he said. 

"The sheer volume of debt is still very large," he said. "If the current climate of very low interest rates were to change, and interest rates were to rise, the economic challenges of high levels of indebtedness would become more severe." 

The Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee meets Wednesday and Thursday and is likely to leave its key interest rate unchanged at a record low of 0.5%. While some members of the committee have voted to raise the key interest rate in recent months, Mr. King has favored leaving policy unchanged. 

Mr. King said it will take many years to repair the damage caused by the financial crisis. "The economic challenges will last for many years," he said. "The financial crisis is far from over." 

Mr. King earlier said the sovereign-debt crisis in the euro zone is only one of the threats to a sustained recovery in the European Union's economy. 

"There are still many risks to the recovery of the European economy," Mr. King said in his capacity as vice chairman of the European Systemic Risk Board, a group of regulators responsible for identifying and combating threats to the financial system. 

The ESRB may have to recommend steps to limit credit growth or tackle a rapid rise in asset prices that could threaten financial stability, and Mr. King appealed to lawmakers for their support when that happens. "At times the ESRB will be doing things that are unpopular," he said. "We will need your support." 

The European Banking Authority is collating the results of a fresh round of tests designed to establish whether the bloc's banks have enough capital. Speaking alongside Mr. King, EBA Chairman  Andrea Enria said banks and national supervisors must have their recapitalization plans ready when the results are published in late June. 

"Backstop measures need to be there prior to the publication of the stress tests," he said. 

Mr. King said recapitalization of weak banks must occur as soon as the results are announced. "It would be most unfortunate if the stress tests were to appear, and there was a gap," he said. "All national authorities must be ready to recapitalize any institutions for which the stress tests indicate a recapitalization is necessary." 

But Mr. Enria said the stress tests may reveal problems that don't require an immediate fix, and that in those cases there may be "a window of six months within which we would expect remedial actions to be taken." 

"The type of actions [inspired by the tests] could be more varied than just raising core capital and raising it very fast," he added. 

