 Austin, Texas 

The audience sat in silence in the sold-out pews of St. Martin's Lutheran Church. It had come to hear music by the Renaissance composer Josquin Desprez and the contemporary composer Robert Kyr, but the program set aside a few quiet minutes for reading the program and lyrics. Then the electric lights dimmed while dozens of candles, arrayed on tall platforms behind the singers, were lit, one by one. Before a note was sung, minutes ticked by with the only sound coming from Conspirare's 18 singers, an instrumental quartet and 400 listeners all breathing together.

"To breathe together" is a literal translation of the Latin word conspirare, which lends its name to the "company of voices" that for two decades has been selling out churches and concert halls in this city better known for indie rock and alt-country than for classical music. The chorus's surprising popularity owes much to its immaculate singing, but also to director Craig Hella Johnson's devotion to fulfilling the craving that listeners have for community and inclusive spirituality. The program book noted that even though some music Conspirare performs comes from particular religious traditions, it doesn't mean to exclude listeners from outside those traditions. "This music itself is sacred," the soft-spoken Mr. Johnson insists, "no matter if we find it in a church or concert hall."

The opening silence, the candles, the subtle lighting cues are all designed to put audiences in a receptive mood. "With our modern ears and noisy lives," Mr. Johnson asks, "how can we get back to really hearing this music?"

Conspirare's audience-engaging efforts have paid off. The ensemble has earned five Grammy nominations, appeared in two PBS specials and recorded more than a dozen CDs, several on the esteemed Harmonia Mundi label. Its children's choirs tour internationally. Next month, Carnegie Hall's Weill Music Institute brings the group to New York to lead its popular "community sings," and plans include a Midwest tour, new commissions, and a project to create a secular hymnal—a songbook for the 21st century. 

Conspirare has become renowned for expanding the boundaries of choral performance, especially through nontraditional holiday concerts, anyone-can-join Big Sings and "collage" concerts whose repertoire might range from Renaissance motets to poetry readings to works by Leonard Cohen, Stevie Wonder and Sting. "We really want to connect with our audience," Mr. Johnson says. "No matter what repertoire we're doing, we hope people will come to a concert of totally unknown music because they trust us."

That trust was tested by last weekend's program of contemporary classical music, Renaissance polyphony and Bach. While such music has a reputation for appealing more to the head than the heart, Mr. Johnson knew that Conspirare could find the emotional essence other performers often miss. And he had found a like-minded partner: Mr. Kyr, probably the Northwest's leading composer, has forged a unique, ear-friendly sound that embraces Western medieval, Renaissance and Baroque style as well as Pacific Rim traditions. The 58-year-old University of Oregon professor has written dozens of compelling orchestral works, including 12 symphonies, plus a prodigious body of choral and chamber music. 

Mr. Kyr's music "is at once smart, beautifully crafted and spiced with honest human expression," Mr. Johnson explains, while the composer praises "Craig's attitude toward creating a community of artists who work together to interpret the score, which goes beyond technical mastery into that emotional depth and spiritual life of the music." Both employ nonmusical means to break the boundary between stage and audience—sympathetic lighting, choreographed movement and use of the entire performance space.

For the four-concert, three-day series that ended Sunday, the pair co-created a program based on their shared admiration for the relatively neglected masters of polyphonic music, devoting one concert each to a composer who wrote music based on interweaving melodies. Mr. Kyr has spent 40 years studying the now rarely performed music of the Franco-Flemish Desprez (1450-1521), and prepared new editions of his scores for these concerts. Mr. Johnson's first love is the Spanish composer Tomás Luis de Victoria (1548-1611). The two also venerated Orlandus Lassus and J.S. Bach, perhaps the greatest composers of the Renaissance and Baroque, respectively.

"The spiritual life and immediacy of this music is something we are thirsting for, and it connects us to something we don't have in most of the music of our own time," Mr. Kyr maintains. This also, he says, explains why not only he but Arvo Pärt, Steve Reich and other contemporary classical composers draw more on such distant sources than on later classical or Romantic composers. For the four programs, Mr. Johnson asked Mr. Kyr to compose modern responses to Desprez, de Victoria, Lassus and Bach, using references and musical material from them as seeds for thoroughly 21st-century music.

The results justified the two creators' faith in ancient and modern music. There wasn't an empty seat at any of the performances. Friday's opening Desprez concert ended poignantly with the soprano soloist in Mr. Kyr's plangent new psalm setting, "Toward Dawn," moving slowly down the aisle, plaintively calling out to the chorus, whose singers had gradually left the stage and reassembled in the back of the hall. Conspirare sounded especially convincing in the opulent music of Lassus the next afternoon and in Mr. Kyr's stirring "Santa Fe Vespers 2010." That evening's magnificent de Victoria concert culminated in Mr. Kyr's electrifying polychoral motet for chorus, soloist and strings, "A Time for Song." 

Sunday's closing concert featured the music of Bach and all four of Mr. Kyr's new responses, with three interpolated duos for soprano and baritone soloists and strings, combined into a masterly seven-movement cantata, "Songs of the Soul," a powerful new achievement in American music that vividly traces a journey from despair to transcendence.

The audience responded Sunday, as it did after each concert, with a prolonged standing ovation. The singers bowed. Messrs. Kyr and Johnson embraced. But perhaps the most telling moment happened a few seconds earlier, in the brief pause after the last notes faded and Mr. Johnson kept his arms aloft, accompanied by the beautiful, mysterious silence of several hundred rapt musicians and listeners, breathing together.

 Mr. Campbell covers the performing arts for the Journal.  