As businesses become increasingly global, more parents are taking jobs overseas. 

As it isn't always desirable for children to move abroad, many find themselves shuttling between school and their parents' base, often making the journey alone—a potentially nerve-wracking experience for all. 

Most major airlines run programs for these junior jet-setters, known as "unaccompanied minors," to ensure they get from A to B with the minimum of worry and potential for mishap.

"I take the view that it is far better—and much more fun—for my children to travel back to the U.K. to attend school than to be cooped up here, where they would have little freedom to roam around and make new friends," says  Charles Turner, a partner in a European law firm, who spends much of his time at outposts in Asia, including Malaysia's capital, Kuala Lumpur. 

"My wife and I tend to go and collect the children from school at the start of the summer holidays but otherwise they travel backwards and forwards as unaccompanied minors in the care of the airline," he says. 

The most recent figures from the Independent Schools Council show there are around 70,000 children at boarding schools in the U.K. alone. 

While many have homes and parents just a few hours' drive away, some are at boarding school because their parents are based overseas. 

"I've known many children who fly alone, especially from the Far East, to boarding schools in the U.K.," says  Josephine Taylor, a teacher at a U.K. private school for children up to 13 years old. "One school I taught in used to have a special connection for planes from places such as Hong Kong, Singapore and Cyprus. One child at the school where I teach travels with an 'air nanny' all the way from a Unesco site in Africa at the beginning and end of each term." 

Children used to flying backward and forward between home and school tend to be relatively mature because of all the traveling, even at seven or eight years of age, she says. 

Certainly this is true of Charles, now old enough to fly on his own, who remembers the journeys between his school in England and his parents' base in Toronto with nothing but affection. "I used to love it, particularly going from London to Toronto at the end of term when I could spend time before the flight in  British Airways
ICAGY


0.14
%




' special lounge at Heathrow airport, just for kids traveling on their own," he says. 

"I would be checked in by someone from school but I remember they weren't allowed to go beyond the lounge reception area. Most of the lounge was just for children—adults were barred," he says. "It was like heaven for us, with games machines, videos, great snacks and fizzy drinks. We were all taken onto the flight together, usually about three or four of us, and we all sat together." 

For some youngsters, though, traveling alone for the first time can be a daunting prospect. But there are ways to lessen the trauma, says  Maria Cortez, whose husband is a diplomat in a European embassy in the Middle East. 

"Parents should explain to their children what will happen and what to expect, so that they are not nervous about traveling," she says. 

She advises talking children through the whole process and reassuring them that they'll be looked after by the airline's staff, both on the ground and in the air. 

"But at the same time, remind them that they must behave properly—not jumping up and down during the flight annoying other passengers or kicking the seats in front of them." 

  Derek Morgan, a senior British publishing executive based in Sydney, is a big fan of the airlines' unaccompanied minors' programs.

"I think the...system offered by the airlines works really well," he says. "Certainly my wife and I would have found it difficult to live in Australia without it. The only other option would have been for my wife to stay in Europe to be close to the children and that would not have been ideal."

Perhaps because of Britain's colonial past and long-established boarding school system, British Airways is one of the leaders in taking care of children traveling on their own. 

The airline has special lounges at both London's Heathrow and Gatwick airports for the exclusive use of its Skyflyer Solo unaccompanied-minors program, which is open to all children traveling on their own, from the age of 5 until their 12th birthday. 

From the time you check in the children in their special lounge they are looked after by dedicated staff. Those operating the children-only lounges at Heathrow and Gatwick are BA ground staff, but they are often also experienced with working with children.

At busy times of the day there could be about three staff members supervising the unaccompanied minors in the lounge, with maybe 10 or 12 children in their care, a BA spokesman says. 

These staff members take care of the children until they escort them onto their flights. 

Once aboard, the junior flyers are introduced to the crew members assigned to look after them and make sure they are entertained, given the right food and drinks and are generally happy.

On landing, children are handed over only to named individuals, who must provide photo identification. 

British Airways says around 150,000 young travelers use its Skyflyer Solo service each year but it points out you can't just turn up with your child and pay for the service at the airport—at least 48 hours' notice is required. 

Airlines' surcharges on top of the normal fare for the unaccompanied minor service vary, but most charge around $50 for a one-way journey and $100 round-trip on short-haul flights and $75 single, $150 return for long-haul flights. 

Some airlines will only take unaccompanied children on direct flights, with no transits, and many suggest you avoid booking your child onto the last flight of the day, in case of any technical problems. 

French national carrier Air France has a system similar to BA's for looking after unaccompanied minors, with staff members assigned to take care of them from the time they check in until they are handed over to a guardian at their destination.

Children get a special pouch to wear, as well as a badge and a travel folder, so they are easy to identify at any point during the journey. 

Germany's  Lufthansa
DLAKY


0.95
%




 lets children between ages 5 and 12 travel unaccompanied, under the supervision of airline staff. Those aged 12 and over may not only travel alone but they can also be responsible for the care of a younger child, provided a parent or guardian gives consent. 

Similar rules apply if children are flying with airlines based in other parts of the world. Singapore Airlines, for example, insists all children between ages 5 and 17 who are traveling without an adult make use of its unaccompanied minor service. 

And Qatar Airways provides an escort service for children between the ages of 3 and 5, and the more standard unaccompanied minor service for older children. 