  Boeing Co.
BA


-0.74
%




 executives got a little breathing room for the newest version of the iconic 747 jumbo jet and a boost to the Dreamliner after two big Chinese airlines on Tuesday signaled they would order new planes. 

  Air China, the nation's flagship carrier, announced orders for five 747-8 Intercontinentals, the latest passenger version of the big Boeing jet that was first introduced in 1970. The planes—which are 18 feet longer than the previous 747 version—are expected to be delivered to Air China beginning in 2014.

Later Tuesday, HNA Group, parent of Hong Kong Airlines, announced its intent to purchase 38 new Boeing jets: six 777 cargo planes, 30 of the forthcoming 787-9, a stretched version of the Dreamliner and two of the first 787 variant, to be used as VIP transport. Boeing said it was still working with HNA to finalize the order. 

The announcements coincided with the Asian Aerospace Expo and Congress, being held in Hong Kong. 

The new 747-8 will typically seat about 470 passengers and the deal is worth about $1.54 billion at list prices. But Air China officials told reporters they had received "significant price concessions" from Boeing for the planes.

Boeing has struggled to get the 747-8 delivered to customers and has taken more than $1 billion in write-downs associated with the program. The freighter version of the jet is in the midst of its flight test program that began more than a year ago. 

The passenger version was unveiled at a splashy ceremony in Everett, Wash., last month and is expected to make its first flight sometime this month. Both planes are more than two years behind schedule. 

It was noted last month that the new 747-8's first public appearance in a red and orange "sunrise" livery was a departure from the typical blue and white Boeing house colors. The new paint scheme was thought to be a nod to prospective Asian customers. 

Until Tuesday's announcement, only two carriers— Deutsche Lufthansa AG
DLAKY


1.29
%




 and Korean Air Lines Co.—had placed orders for the plane. The plane now has 30 orders from three airline customers and eight orders for the business jet version.

Lufthansa is expected to take delivery of its first 747-8 passenger aircraft sometime in early 2012.

Meanwhile, Korean Air Lines may not receive the first of the 10 Boeing Co. 787 Dreamliner aircraft it has on order this year, in a further possible delay to an order placed by the airline in 2005. 

Charlie Miller, Boeing's vice-president for international corporate communications, said on Tuesday that the airplane manufacturer will commence deliveries of B787s with All Nippon Airways Co. in the third quarter, but no specific decision has been made about the delivery schedule for Korean Air. 

A delay into 2012 would mark a further setback for Korean Air, South Korea's largest airline company by revenue, which had been expecting delivery of the first four 787s in 2011 after making an order in early 2005. 

Boeing has orders for 843 Dreamliners from 56 customers. The program has been plagued with problems and is now running more than three years late. 

Yoon Hee-do, an analyst at Korea Investment & Securities, said Boeing is unlikely to make the first delivery in 2011 as it needs more time to test the planes. 

With lighter composite materials accounting for around 50% of its construction, the Dreamliner is expected to be about 20% more fuel-efficient than similar-sized planes. 

 Write to  Peter Sanders at peter.sanders@wsj.com 