Syrian security forces clashed with a crowd of demonstrators in the southern city of Daraa and dispersed a sit-in in the coastal town of Latakia, amid signs of continuing tensions despite government efforts to stifle antigovernment unrest.

In Daraa, security forces attacked a crowd of a few hundred people with tear gas and water cannon, according to witnesses and media reports. There were conflicting reports about security forces firing shots in the air and into the crowd.

In Latakia, residents told media that groups of plainclothes militia wearing black were setting up checkpoints, carrying swords and guns and stopping cars to ask for identification.

Soldiers were deployed in Daraa and Latakia to protect government buildings and banks, according to reports.Both cities have been sealed off and journalists have been banned from entering making it difficult to independently verify reports.

The developments Monday suggested Syria could follow a pattern that has been seen in other regional pro-democracy uprisings, in which deadly government crackdowns on protesters fueled more anger and heightened opposition demands.

Most of the demonstrations in Syria have called for reforms but fallen short of demanding regime change. "If these demands are not met, soon people will be asking for more," said a political analyst in Damascus. 

Track events day by day.

President Bashar al-Assad is facing the most serious challenge in his tenure in office as protests have spread across Syria. Syria's vice president said Mr. Assad would speak to the nation by Tuesday and announce steps the government would take to keep its promise of reform.

Analysts said they expected Mr. Assad to announce he would lift the emergency law that has been in place for nearly 50 years and allow for more political and media freedoms.

On the Facebook Page "Syrian Revolution 2011," which has become the virtual headquarters for organizing the demonstrations, one person wrote on Monday, "We ask you to come to the streets today and protest in support to our people in Daraa after security forces reopened fire on them this morning." 

A large pro-government rally was planned for Tuesday in Damascus with government employees and school students obliged to take part. One business received a fax from the chamber of industry asking them to send their workers for pro-Assad demonstration on Tuesday.

Mr. Assad's supporters say they are willing to give him a chance to make good on his promise of reform. A businessman in Aleppo said, "We are all united against bad people, Dr. Assad is a good person and we need to give him a hand."

The rally is meant to set the stage for Mr. Assad and project him as still a popular leader. 

For many Syrians used to stability in a region rife with turmoil, the past week has been unnerving. Some say the demonstrations have disrupted daily life. Some people say they have emptied their bank accounts and converted their savings into dollars and other foreign currencies, bracing themselves for a period of instability.

Residents in Damascus, Aleppo and other cities say they are staying glued to television at night, wondering what will come next.

Opponents, disturbed by the violent suppression of protesters that have left dozens killed and injured, are skeptical. An engineer in Damascus said if protesters back off the streets, the deaths of victims would be in vain. "We should not forget them," he said.

 Write to  Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com 