BRUSSELS—Belgium's King Albert II asked the country's caretaker government to draft a new 2011 budget Monday in an attempt to defuse fears of runaway deficits amid a political vacuum.

The king plans to meet Tuesday with a political mediator who resigned last week after a failed attempt to find a solution to the gridlock in forming a new executive and agreeing on institutional reforms. 

The mediator, Johan Vande Lanotte, resigned after the latest move to form a coalition government collapsed. 

Pressure is building as political parties have been unable to form a new government since elections in June. It has left the caretaker government unable to make major budget decisions, adding Belgium to the list of euro-zone nations perceived as presenting a risk of default. 

Standard & Poor's, the ratings agency, has said Belgium's credit rating could be downgraded if it can't form a government in coming months. 

The Belgian political gridlock has added to the debt crisis gripping the 17-nation currency bloc, as bond investors worry that Portugal might soon join Greece and Ireland in seeking an international bailout. 

On Monday, the extra yield demanded by investors as a premium to buy Belgian government bonds instead of safe-haven German bonds, or bunds, widened further, closing in on the record levels hit in November. The 10-year Belgian-to-German yield spread was 12 basis points wider at 137.80 basis points, with the benchmark Belgian note now yielding 4.25%.

Belgium hasn't faced problems in issuing debt so far because it has a high domestic savings rate and an impeccable repayment record. But investors worry about runaway budget deficits if the political paralysis continues.

The king asked acting Prime Minister Yves Leterme on Monday to prepare a 2011 budget with a lower deficit than the 4.1% agreed on with the European Commission last year, the royal office said. 

King Albert is to meet Mr. Vande Lanotte, a 55-year-old Flemish socialist, late Tuesday afternoon, a spokesman for the king said Monday. 

The mediator tendered his resignation last Thursday, but the king has yet to accept. Mr. Vande Lanotte's decision to resign came after parties disagreed with a compromise proposal because it didn't give enough powers to the regions. 

The main disagreements revolve around political control of the Brussels suburbs, regional control of government services and transfers of tax revenue from Dutch-speaking Flanders to Brussels and French-speaking Wallonia. 

The New Flemish Alliance, the nationalist party that won the June elections, wanted more than 40% of tax revenue returned to the regions. Mr. Vande Lanotte had proposed around 25%. 

"There is a lot of mistrust," said a person close to the negotiations. "It is very difficult to see where we are going now." 

If the king accepts Mr. Vande Lanotte's resignation, he is likely to appoint another mediator. But he also might call early elections if a political resolution is deemed impossible. 

The clash is mainly between politicians from Flanders—where the nationalist right-wing party that won elections in June wants more power for the regions rather than for the central government—and socialists from French-speaking Wallonia, who generally favor a more centralized administration and won the June elections in that region. 

The leaders of both parties had initially taken the lead in the negotiations. 

Lowering Belgium's budget deficit in 2011 more than expected in the European Stability Program "might appease financial markets in the short run," said ING Bank economist Philippe Ledent. But it will be difficult for the caretaker government to take the structural measures required by financial markets to ensure a stable trajectory of public debt in the medium term. 