Steve Jobs is taking a leave of absence from a company with great technology and a greater brand, perhaps the world's best. He's been a stellar CEO, but Apple has also enjoyed an unbelievable run that begs to be understood as more than just one man's magic.

Mr. Jobs is not a god. Mr. Jobs may be a product visionary and marketing genius, but a success as uncanny as Apple's has many fathers, one of which is luck. To wit, an unappreciated bit of Jobs luck was his relegation to the sidelines just as the tech industry was euphorically creating the Internet bubble of the 1990s.

This insight, we hasten to add, has not been suckling for years but comes to us via a headline this week about the conviction in a French court of Jean-Marie Messier for misleading investors.

Bear with us. Mr. Messier was a name to conjure with a decade ago, author of a breathtaking transformation of a French water utility into Vivendi Universal, a global media giant, including a Hollywood studio, music business, video games, a mobile phone network and a cable TV company.

Mr. Messier was a visionary (of which there were many at the time) who preached the importance of delivering media content wirelessly, regardless of platform. He believed in mobile broadband. He created his own short-lived cloud portal, Vizzavi, that would follow users everywhere, supplying high-quality video, audio and e-commerce to any kind of device.

If that sounds like he was anticipating the iPhone/iTunes revolution a decade later, he was—as were many others. In fact, Mr. Messier was placing his own little bet on top of much larger bets by Europe's telecom giants, who went off the deep end investing in 3G wireless networks in the 1990s in anticipation of the digital nirvana. What became known as Europe's $500 billion "wireless bubble" wasn't precisely replicated in the U.S., but not for a lack of urging. Larry Ellison, Steve Ballmer and other tech leaders took to podiums to fret that the U.S. was being left in Europe's mobile dust.

And where was Mr. Jobs when all this was going on? This may turn out to be a seminal question for tech history. He had long since been kicked out of Apple in 1994, when Mr. Messier commenced his meteoric rise and fall.

Mr. Jobs was running Next Computer, making workstations for scientists. He had bought an animation studio and was learning how to make digital movies. After he returned to a crisis-plagued Apple in late 1996, he was preoccupied with cutting and bailing and creating the comparatively unambitious iMac while others were pursuing their bubble visions.

And even when Apple's own mobile strategy began to take shape, look how plodding it really was. The original iPod had no wireless connectivity. The iPhone and iPad today are still designed in anticipation of the user storing most of his media content locally. 

Only now, in 2011, is Apple building a cloud farm in North Carolina, which all presume is aimed at providing the bottomless library of streaming content that Mr. Messier envisioned a decade earlier.

Let's try out a hypothesis: Mr. Jobs's slowness is the key to Apple's success. His focus on the device, his emphasis on perfecting the user experience, meant holding back, not overreaching. The iPod would only be a music player. The iPhone and iPad would be Web-browsing devices that wouldn't play most of the video on the Web. Apple TV remains "a hobby" (his words) because there's no way yet to deliver an acceptable user experience. And notice that each of these device categories had been around for five or 10 years by the time Apple entered (clobbered) them.

Mr. Jobs has been the great withholder. If Apple were looking to encapsulate his wisdom in two words, it could do worse than "speed kills." It kills user experience by trying to deliver more than can be delivered beautifully.

Of course, this fundamental strategy orientation might now change. Apple has allowed itself to be drawn into a battle for mobile-platform market share with Google's Android. Apple's management is increasingly focused on growing an ecosystem rather than on creating devices. The Microsofting of Apple may be at hand, the company becoming a feckless and inefficient user of capital as it seeks to protect itself on every front from every perceived threat to its privileged position. Before long, Apple might even need a Steve Jobs to come back and save it again.