Jurors weighing the fate of Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam appeared to focus Monday on allegations he traded on inside information about a 2008 wireless technology venture. 

At the start of their 10th day of deliberations, jurors listened again to tapes of 12 of Mr. Rajaratnam's conversations that were secretly recorded by the government, most with former  Intel Corp.
INTC


-0.15
%




 executive Rajiv Goel. 

Mr. Rajaratnam, 53 years old, is charged with 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy. Mr. Goel, who pleaded guilty to securities fraud and conspiracy in February 2010, testified for the government against Mr. Rajaratnam earlier in the trial. Mr. Rajaratnam and his lawyers have said he traded based only on legitimate research. 

Federal prosecutors contend Mr. Goel, a longtime friend of Mr. Rajaratnam's, tipped him about details of the 2008 joint wireless venture in which Intel was an investor. Mr. Rajaratnam allegedly made more than $850,000 for Galleon by buying shares of  Clearwire Corp., one of the participants in the venture, in March 2008. 

Jurors asked to hear the tapes Monday in two separate sessions, six at a time. In the wiretapped conversations, Mr. Rajaratnam and Mr. Goel discussed the timing of the venture's announcement, the composition of its board and the ownership stakes of various companies involved. 

In his closing arguments, Mr. Rajaratnam's attorney,  John Dowd, said such a potential deal had already been publicly discussed by some of the companies and mentioned in news articles and analyst reports. Mr. Dowd also said some of Mr. Goel's information about the deal was wrong and didn't qualify as illegal tips, and he told jurors Mr. Goel was untrustworthy as a witness.

The jurors also heard Mr. Rajaratnam receive a call about the venture from his younger brother Rengan on March 25, 2008. As soon as Mr. Rajaratnam answered, his brother said, "Oh dude, we're f—," and told him news of the deal had been reported in The Wall Street Journal. "I don't know how much you got in today, but I think it's gonna rip tomorrow,"  Rengan Rajaratnam said, referring to Clearwire's stock. 

Mr. Dowd had argued prosecutors took the call out of context, and that Mr. Rajaratnam's brother knew about the technology because he had just researched it on a trip to Washington, D.C.

The jurors also heard an October 2008 call in which Mr. Rajaratnam told Mr. Goel he had purchased stock for him in another company, PeopleSupport Inc. Prosecutors have alleged those trades were also made based on inside information as a form of payback to Mr. Goel for tips. Mr. Dowd previously told jurors that Mr. Rajaratnam was just helping a friend by buying a stock he liked in Mr. Goel's account, which he was free to do. 

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 