While the 2010 season is often called the Year of the Pitcher, fantasy baseball players remember it more as the Year of Bautista. With 54 home runs, Toronto's Jose Bautista, who had never hit more than 16 in any of his eight major league seasons, single-handedly changed the way fantasy baseball owners look at players. In the past, when someone like Bautista would heat up or hit home runs in bunches, owners would still stay away, fully expecting the player to regress to the mean. This happens 99% of the time. Bautista represented the other 1%.

After hitting 16 home runs between April and May, Bautista hit a dry patch in June, with just four. But he hit another 34 dingers over the final three months and became the most valuable player in most fantasy baseball leagues, considering his bargain-bin early-season price. And he hasn't let up this year, hitting .360 with eight home runs through Wednesday night's games. 

 WSJ's fantasy sports columnist Nando Di Fino and Tom Lorenzo of RotoExperts.com and SiriusXM will field questions from WSJ readers about this young season and how to improve your team. The live chat begins on Friday, April 29 at 1 p.m. Ask your questions now. 

Bautista has single-handedly opened the door for speculation on all types of players who would otherwise be overlooked or brushed off as just another streaking player. The Pandora's box he opened with his eye-opening campaign, however, was that anyone on a seemingly out-of-nowhere tear can now be dubbed the next Bautista, even though there's a far better chance he could be the next Emilio Bonifacio.

To pinpoint the next Bautista, look for the telltale signs. A big one is playing time. Since 2004, when he made his debut with Baltimore, Bautista had more than 400 at-bats in a season just twice—last year and in 2007, when he hit 15 home runs in 532 at-bats. During his time with Tampa Bay, Pittsburgh, Baltimore, Kansas City and Toronto, he had become a utility player who was more of a stop-gap than anything else. Prior to 2010, he was known more for his defensive range than for his bat. It turns out he was just waiting for a full chance to show his stuff.

A change in approach from coaches should also make a difference in finding a hidden gem. Bautista benefitted from the homer-friendly, hit-more-fly-balls philosophy put in place by former Toronto manager Cito Gaston and from some timely advice from hitting coach Dwayne Murphy. FanHouse's Frankie Piliere, a former scout, explained it in detail in this article from last August.

Bautista was never anyone's idea of the next big thing. He was a 20th-round pick who spent three years in the minors before playing for four teams in 2007 because he was a Rule 5 pick and had to stay in the majors as a condition of the pick. He was 29 in 2010. In short, Bautista is the player many general managers, fantasy players and owners never saw coming. So the next Bautista also needs a low major-league profile.

What does this all add up to? Four players off to hot starts could fit the bill in 2011. 

 Sam Fuld, OF, Tampa Bay Rays 

 His Early Numbers: .350 average, 10 steals

 Why He Could Be The Next Bautista 

Chicago shipped the 29-year-old Fuld to Tampa Bay as part of the Matt Garza deal. He was a 10th-round draft pick but hit .299 in 2009 with the Cubs. He doesn't have much power, but can run (he has 10 steals already this season) and hit for average. Manny Ramirez's retirement opened up plenty of playing time for him and he's a great defender, so his glove could keep him in the lineup, allowing him more at-bats and more steals.

 Why He Won't Be the Next Bautista 

With Johnny Damon and B.J. Upton joining him in the outfield most days, Tampa Bay puts out three similarly speedy players without much power. If he starts to fade, he could lose playing time to a corner outfielder like Matt Joyce, who has more pop.

 Potential to Be This Year's Bautista (out of 5): 3

 Willie Bloomquist, OF/SS, Arizona Diamondbacks 

 His Early Numbers: .306 average, seven steals. 

 Why He Could Be The Next Bautista 

Bloomquist, 33, has donned the jerseys of the Royals, Reds, Mariners and Diamondbacks, and is currently on the 15-day disabled list with a sore hamstring. Arizona manager Kirk Gibson seems to like the idea of letting his team run, and Bloomquist has amassed those steals in just 14 games already this season.

 Why He Won't Be the Next Bautista 

Bloomquist got a great deal of playing time filling in for an injured Stephen Drew, who is now back and healthy. And although Bloomquist shifted to the outfield and kept up his hot streak, Gerardo Parra has been getting the starts in Bloomquist's absence, and has played well. Bloomquist could have just gotten hurt at a very inopportune time.

 Potential to Be This Year's Bautista: 1

 Jonny Gomes, OF, Cincinnati Reds 

 His Early Numbers: Six home runs, 16 RBI, five steals

 Why He Could Be The Next Bautista 

He's always shown flashes of power: his home runs this season aren't a fluke. He also has some speed, which is always a nice boost to a fantasy owner looking at Gomes purely for power numbers. What Gomes, 29, needed was the opportunity to play every day. While the former 18th-round pick of the Rays isn't exactly there yet, he has seen increased playing time the past two seasons.

 Why He Won't Be the Next Bautista 

Because his splits aren't great. His career batting average against right-handed pitchers is a full 50 points lower than his average against lefties (.279 vs. .229). Last season was also the first time Gomes had seen 500 at-bats in his major league career, and his home run totals actually went down.

 Potential to Be This Year's Bautista:2.5

 Edwin Encarnacion, 3B, Toronto Blue Jays 

 His Early Numbers: .290 average, six RBI

 Why He Could Be The Next Bautista 

Yes, the 28-year-old Encarnacion has yet to homer this season, but he had 21 home runs in 332 at-bats last year, including 10 in his final 30 games. A ninth-round pick, Encarnacion has played in the Reds, Rangers and Blue Jays organizations, and was even briefly a member of the A's this offseason. One big benefit is that he is in the same organization as Bautista and had a front-row seat for the spectacular transformation of his fellow slugger.

 Why He Won't Be the Next Bautista 

His recurring wrist problems tend to land him on the disabled list and slow any momentum.

 Potential to Be This Year's Bautista: 4