LISBON—Portugal's prime minister, José Sócrates, was re-elected leader of Portugal's ruling Socialist Party with an overwhelming majority. 

Mr. Sócrates was re-elected secretary general of Portugal's ruling party with 93.3% of the votes or 26,713 votes, the Socialist Party said Sunday on its website. Jacinto Serra came in second place with 3.33% of the votes or 954 votes. 

Mr. Sócrates, who has governed with a minority in Parliament since the last election in 2009, resigned late Wednesday after all opposition parties in the assembly voted to reject a proposed new austerity plan. 

Early elections will likely be called for late May or early June. Until then, Mr. Sócrates will stay on as a caretaker prime minister. He has said he will be a candidate under his Socialist Party. 

President Aníbal Cavaco Silva, who will be responsible for calling new elections, held meetings with the leaders of all the major parties to see if there is a way to form a coalition government without having to call for elections. 

The leaders of Portugal's three largest parties called for the president to declare elections as quickly as possible. The Socialist Party is scheduled to hold its 17th national congress on April 8-10. 

Portugal's main opposition leader, Pedro Passos Coelho, said in an interview Saturday that if he is elected prime minister, he plans to meet budget targets in coming years, and that he won't hesitate in requesting a bailout if the need arises. 

Based on a recent opinion poll conducted by Portugal's largest newspaper, Mr. Passos Coelho's Social Democrats would have a majority win if elections were held now. 

Mr. Passos Coelho said if elected, he plans to implement further cuts in government spending and accelerate privatizations to deal with the immediate budget deficit. He also said structural reforms are essential to boost the country's economic growth prospects. 

Mr. Passos Coelho said Portugal needs to tackle short- and long-term problems with "decisive" measures that will have immediate effect in the markets. 

He said that, although he hopes a new government will be able to show investors and the European Union that it is capable of tackling its problems alone, "if it becomes inevitable to ask for a rescue, we will." 

Both Messrs. Sócrates and Passos Coelho have spent two days in Brussels trying to convince EU leaders that, despite the political crisis, Portugal will meet budget targets essential for it to stay financially independent. 

The country has promised to cut its budget deficit to 4.6% of gross domestic product this year and to 3% and 2%, respectively, in 2012 and 2013. The deficit was 9.3% in 2009. 

Mr. Passos Coelho said he will soon present a party plan to meet those goals. 

"First of all, we need to show the government is adapting to our economic reality. That means shrinking its size, making it more efficient and frugal," he said, adding he plans to cut the number of ministers and support staff. 

In addition, Mr. Passos Coelho said, his government would speed up a privatization plan, particularly in the transport and utility sectors. 

"We need to privatize the majority of public companies in Portugal, not only to cut our public debt, but also because it isn't efficient that the state owns companies that are competing in the market with others," he said. 

Mr. Passos Coelho said he can't promise not to raise taxes, something Mr. Sócrates's government has done aggressively. However, he said such increases would come as a last resort. 

Rifts between the opposition leader and Mr. Sócrates have been evident for months, with Mr. Passos Coelho accusing the government of being too slow in dealing with a crisis that has put Portugal close to a EU-IMF bailout. Mr. Sócrates , meanwhile, has accused the opposition of creating a political crisis that has made the rescue more likely. 

 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com and Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com 