KABUL—Increased American scrutiny of Pakistan after Osama bin Laden's death isn't likely to force the Pakistani establishment to diminish its support of the Taliban-led Afghan insurgency at this stage, Afghan and coalition officials say. 

Afghan leaders have long argued that the focus of the American war effort in the region should be on insurgent sanctuaries in Pakistan instead of in the Afghan countryside. Bin Laden's killing in his hideout just 40 miles about 60 kilometers from Islamabad provided ample fodder for Afghan leaders to hammer away at that point.

"This is Pakistan's state policy—they use terrorist groups for their regional interests," said Nasrullah Stanekzai, legal adviser to Afghan President Hamid Karzai. "I don't think Pakistan will change in the future."

Pakistan, which nurtured the Taliban movement beginning in the 1990s, has been backing the Afghan insurgency to secure a key voice for itself once most U.S.-led forces withdraw in 2014, political analysts say, and to keep in check the aspirations of its archrival India. 

Though Pakistani officials publicly deny their support for the Afghan insurgents, U.S. officials have little doubt that Pakistan's powerful Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate spy agency is deeply involved in helping the Taliban.

On Thursday, Pakistan's Foreign Secretary Salman Bashir denied recent allegations by U.S. officials that Inter-Services Intelligence had played a role in harboring bin Laden.

Yet despite American suspicions that some Pakistani officials were complicit in protecting bin Laden, the U.S. so far appears to have little leverage to force nuclear-armed Pakistan to make amends by abandoning its traditional support for the Taliban and the related Haqqani network insurgents.

"Most likely Pakistan's immediate reaction to the bin Laden episode will be defiant," said  Vali Nasr, a Tufts University professor who until recently served as senior adviser to the U.S. special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. "It could become less cooperative in clamping down on Haqqani network and Taliban sanctuaries inside Pakistan to both contain what it may see as growing U.S. confidence in pushing Pakistan to do more, and to protect those Taliban elements it may view as essential for sustaining its position in Afghanistan."

North Atlantic Treaty Organization officials in Afghanistan caution that, after the embarrassment of the bin Laden raid, putting the screws on Pakistan could prove counterproductive. "This is obviously a time to press one's advantage," said one NATO official in Kabul. But NATO, he added, has "to continue to engage Pakistan—and certainly not turn them into a pariah in any way, shape or form."

Some Taliban officials are already expressing concern at a possible Pakistani clampdown. "Pakistan always plays a hypocrisy game," said a Taliban commander in Afghanistan's Paktia province, reached by phone. "Without doubt they are supporting some Taliban commanders, but whenever Pakistan is under global pressure they detain or kill some Taliban commanders, and hand them over to the Americans to get credit." 

—Habib Khan Totakhil  contributed to this article. 