OMAHA, Neb.—Taxes and spending aren't dominating just the federal debate. Months after an election marked by tea-party activism and a huge backlash against incumbents, they continue to roil local politics too.

At the end of this month, Jim Suttle, the brash first-term Democratic mayor of this prairie city, will face a recall election financed by backers of the opponent he defeated a year and a half ago. Critics are angry at a series of local-tax increases he instituted last year to balance the city budget. 

"Some people see Suttle as an extension of Obama," said John Chatelain, one of the Omaha recall organizers who kicked off the petition drive at a tea-party rally. "The disgust they have for Obama going against the will of the people gets channeled into the recall."

The mayor is fighting the effort vigorously. "The game is over and we won," said Mr. Suttle in an interview in his office. "But now they want a fifth quarter. They can't accept the fact that they lost."

Mr. Suttle is the latest in a growing list of mayors, school-board officials and city-council members across the country targeted for recall by voters angered by a toxic brew of tax increases and service cuts. The number of recall attempts has doubled between 2009 and 2010, according to an estimate by Leslie Graves, editor of Ballotpedia a website that tracks signature-driven referendums. 

In the past two years, recall efforts have been launched against mayors in Chattanooga, Tenn.; Kansas City, Mo.; Toledo and Akron, Ohio; Portland, Ore.; and Miami.

Contributing to voter frustration, said Tom Cochran, chief executive of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, is that cities and towns are facing aging infrastructures, increasing state and federal regulations and gaping holes in pension funds. 

At the same time, property and sales tax collections are down and aid from state government is shrinking.

Mr. Cochran says mounting recalls should be made more difficult to avoid cities being held hostage by animated minorities. "The political climate is toxic and this archaic rule is being put to sinister use," he said. 

But Paul Jacob, president of Citizens in Charge, a group that seeks to make recalls more accessible, says people are demanding more accountability. "The argument that citizens ought to butt out and let politicians alone doesn't fly," said Mr. Jacob, who is a consultant in the effort to oust Mr. Suttle in Omaha.

The growing number of recall campaigns suggests that the expense of such petition drives is increasingly being trumped by a deep well of voter anger. That's especially clear in Omaha, which ion some ways cuts against the national grain.

Mr. Suttle has raised taxes but hasn't made the sort of unpopular service cuts other cities have, infuriating some voters. Meanwhile, the economy is vigorous, with a jobless rate that is half the U.S. average. Agriculture, education and technology, cornerstones of the regional economy, are fueling a small building boom. Steakhouses are packed on weeknights.

Mr. Suttle is an engineer who served one term in Omaha's city council before winning a tight election for mayor. He overhauled management practices in several city departments but is frequently criticized—even by supporters—as politically tone deaf.

During his campaign, Mr. Suttle pledged to hold the line on taxes. Then sales-tax revenues crashed just before he took office, leaving the city facing a $10 million budget shortfall. 

In response, Mr. Suttle cut the budget by $7 million, then pushed through two real-estate taxes, a commuter tax and a restaurant tax that generate about $37 million a year (a roughly 5% bump to the city's $662 million annual budget). For the owner of a median-price home of $133,000 in Omaha, the real-estate taxes cost $90 a year. 

About $13 million in the additional tax revenue has been used to pay down the $850 million in unfunded pension obligations, said Pam Spaccarotella, the city's finance director.

Mr. Suttle said he weighed the tax increases carefully before determining it was the best course of action. The additional revenue helped improve the city's bond rating. 

"I refused to kick the can down the road," he said.

But those tax increases proved immensely unpopular. A property-owner association paid for a poll last August that found his approval rating at 23%.

Opponents of the mayor collected 37,000 signatures in this city of 455,000. Mr. Suttle tried to quash the effort in court but lost last month. The election is scheduled for Jan. 25. If a majority of voters decide to remove Mr. Suttle from office, a second election would be held to find his successor.

Supporting them were six prominent businessmen who supported Mr. Suttle's Republican opponent in 2009. They donated about $200,000 to pay for professional signature gatherers. 

That sort of support has been crucial in several recent recall efforts, which include a strong tea-party network and deep-pocketed backers. 

In Miami, billionaire Norman Barman paid for the push to oust Mayor Carlos Alvarez, saying he wanted to make sure elected officials were looking out for taxpayers rather than protecting the jobs of government workers. The date of that vote hasn't been set.

Recall rules vary, but generally require a certain percentage of voters to sign a petition to force a new election, with the goal of ousting a previously elected official. 