TRIPOLI, Libya—Warplanes from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization struck the Libyan capital late Monday and early Tuesday, demolishing parts of at least two government buildings in an intensifying campaign to halt Col. Moammar Gadhafi's attacks on rebel-held civilian areas.

There were no reports of fatalities in those buildings but doctors said two blasts shattered windows in a hospital near one of the targets, injuring a 6-year-old boy.

The attacks came hours after NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen warned that time was running out for the Libyan leader, who he said "should realize sooner rather than later that there's no future for him or his regime." 

NATO officials, who began the campaign in March, have in recent weeks stepped up the pace of airstrikes in Tripoli on what they describe as the regime's military command and communications centers.

Late Monday, two explosions shook the city as jets flew overhead. At least one strike hit a two-story building that had been partially damaged in an airstrike on April 30 and is located close to two tall communications towers.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

Officials said the building had housed several government agencies and private social services organizations. Journalists taken by government escorts to the building early Tuesday saw that a wall had been sheared away, exposing a basement through the destroyed floor.

At least four explosions were heard after 2 a.m. Tuesday. Two airstrikes hit a four-story building that government escorts said had once been an intelligence headquarters but now belonged to the Agriculture Ministry. 

Journalists were taken to the Center for Burns and Plastic Surgery, about 200 meters away, but not to the targeted building. Some of the hospital's windows had been shattered, and ceiling panels and light fixtures had crashed to the floor in some rooms. Mohammed Omar, a doctor there, said the boy who was reported injured had been evacuated from the pediatrics ward, along with three other children, to rooms elsewhere in the hospital. He would not allow journalists to see them.

On Monday, four NATO airstrikes hit government weapons depots near Zintan in western Libya, according to rebels in control of the town. And Libyan state television said NATO warships in the Mediterranean had fired missiles Monday at "military and civilian targets" in rebel-held Misrata and the adjacent town of Zlitan. 

There was no immediate confirmation from NATO on any of the reported attacks.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 