Barack Obama was one of the first Western leaders to call for the overthrow of Libyan dictator Moammar Gadhafi. Now the American president is refusing to authorize the military action that could achieve it.

By refusing to back Libya's rebels, Mr. Obama is not only betraying the cause that only a few days ago he was championing with such enthusiasm. He is also fulfilling critics' worst fears of his vaunted worldview and making his presidency look impotent, with all the implications that will have for America's global standing.

By referring the question of a no-fly zone over Libya to the U.N. Security Council, Mr. Obama has effectively washed his hands of the country's fate. He has done so, moreover, just when the rebels' need for outside backing could not be more urgent, with Gadhafi's superior military forces preparing their final assault on the rebel stronghold of Benghazi.

 As of press time last night, the chances that China and Russia would allow Britain's, France's and Lebanon's resolution for a no-fly zone to pass in the Security Council remained negligible. Of course Mr. Obama knew that all along. And even if the Council does pass the resolution, it will unlikely do so before the weekend, by which time the rebels' fate may well have been sealed—in Gadhafi's favor.

Reluctance within the Western alliance was similarly predictable. The British and French governments are campaigning vociferously for action but are getting resistance from Germany and Italy; Paris and London couldn't go it alone. The French Air Force has only recently begun the difficult process of integrating its command structures into NATO, while in Britain the Royal Air Force is still reeling from last year's savage defense cutbacks. If pushed, both countries could make a modest contribution to a no-fly zone. But even with their combined resources one couldn't expect them to undertake the entire operation. Meanwhile German Chancellor Angela Merkel says she is "fundamentally skeptical" about a no-fly zone, fearing any prospect of a drawn-out intervention. The opposition of Rome, Libya's former colonial power and sometime-business partner, is as worrying as it was foreseen, given that NATO would need to rely heavily on its Italian air bases to enforce a no-fly zone.

And what of the Arab states, who through their League have so enthusiastically called for action? Saudi Arabia's air force is equipped with the state-of-the-art Eurofighter, while Egypt has its U.S. F-16s—more than a match for the aging fleet of MiGs that Gadhafi is currently employing against the rebels. 

But neither the Saudis nor the Egyptians, nor any other Arab state for that matter, is keen to become involved in military action against Gadhafi at a time when their own regimes are under threat from anti-government protests. Egypt, which possesses the Arab world's most effective military, is still coming to terms with the aftermath of the antigovernment protests that overthrew Hosni Mubarak. And Saudi troops are simultaneously quelling an uprising in Bahrain, even as they impose a security clampdown at home after democracy activists' recent attempt to stage a "day of rage." 

And so it's down to Libya's bedraggled revolutionaries, who only a few days ago were being actively encouraged by Mr. Obama and other Western leaders to overthrow the Gadhafi regime. The consequences both for Mr. Obama's presidency and the future projection of American power will be immense if Washington abandons the Libyan rebels to their fate. There is little point in calling for the overthrow of a demented dictator if you are not prepared to sanction the measures necessary to achieve it. It will also be difficult for Mr. Obama to refute the accusations of moral cowardice that would inevitably follow a Gadhafi victory.

When it comes to tackling global security issues, the West still relies heavily on American leadership and firepower, even after candidate Obama promised to diminish both. Maybe Gadhafi was the only one paying attention all along.

 Mr. Coughlin is executive foreign editor of London's Daily Telegraph and the author of "Khomeini's Ghost" (Ecco 2009). 