LONDON—Growth in the U.K.'s services sector slowed more than expected in February after having rebounded in the first month of the year, suggesting the economy's growth in the first quarter of 2011 will be modest. 

The services sector's Purchasing Managers Index declined to 52.6 in February from 54.5 in January, but it remained above the 50-point threshold that indicates growth, search group Markit and the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply said. 

Sterling weakened slightly and gilts firmed after the figures were released, as markets lowered their expectations for interest-rate rises. Economists expect the Bank of England will begin raising rates later this year to subdue inflation, even though the economy is still growing slowly.

Activity in the services sector, which accounts for three-quarters of U.K. output, decelerated in February after January's surge in the wake of heavy December snowfall. That snow caused a contraction in services in the last month of 2010, contributing to the 0.6% quarterly drop in economic output between October and December. Economists had expected the services PMI to slow less markedly to 53.9 in February. 

  Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, said the economy looks set to grow 0.5% in the first three months of 2011 from the last quarter of 2010, based on the services PMI and equivalent readings for the manufacturing and construction sectors earlier this week. The composite PMI of all three sectors fell to 55.2 in February from 56.2 in January. 

But Mr. Williamson warned that the figures have been "flattered" by January's rebound—growth in December was hurt by severe weather—and the underlying trend for the U.K. economy "therefore remains weaker" than the PMIs suggest. 

The survey also showed companies continued to shed jobs faster than they employed new workers in February. On the inflation front, there were rises in both the costs faced by services companies, and the prices they charged their customers. 

Consumer prices in January rose 4.0% from a year earlier, double the BOE's medium-term target of 2.0%. The bank's Monetary Policy Committee will announce its latest rate decision next Thursday. 