In 1996, Norman Waitt walked into the Gerald Peters Gallery in Santa Fe, N.M., and fell in love with a $750,000 painting of an Indian chief. 

Mr. Waitt, the multimillionaire co-founder of computer maker Gateway, bought it on the spot, sparking a passion for collecting art from the American West and a decade-long business relationship with Gerald Peters. Between 1996 and 2008, Mr. Waitt and his ex-wife spent more than $13 million for about 50 works from the Gerald Peters Gallery.

Now, however, Mr. Waitt is embroiled in a lawsuit against Mr. Peters over a $1.2 million purchase that may be worth a fraction of that price. The case illustrates the financial risks of the art market and highlights the difficulty of valuing an artist's work.

"You can really get taken in this market," said Mr. Waitt, who left Gateway in 1991 and owns businesses ranging from radio to real-estate. He has spent more than $25 million on his collection, which also includes Renoirs and Matisses.

Over the years, Mr. Peters—a prominent art dealer in New York and Sante Fe—rewarded Mr. Waitt for his business. Whenever Mr. Waitt wanted to return a picture, he got a full credit for another work or exchange. Mr. Waitt exchanged or returned at least four pieces between 1996 and 2008, the two men say. 

When one of Mr. Waitt's staffers expressed concern in 2008 that he might have overpaid for his purchases, Mr. Peters assured him in a meeting that he could return any work at any time for a credit, Mr. Waitt says. Mr. Peters denies that such a conversation took place but confirmed that he had allowed returns by Mr. Waitt. It was during that meeting at the gallery that Mr. Waitt noticed a painting of a buffalo in a Western landscape.

Called "Buffalo Standing in a River," the painting was by Samuel Seymour, an early 19th-century artist who accompanied explorers on early government expeditions through the West. Few of Seymour's works remain, art experts say. The only other painting attributed to Seymour to sell at auction fetched $17,250 in 1995. 

Mr. Waitt offered to buy "Buffalo" for the $1.2 million asking price.

Mr. Peters says he urged Mr. Waitt not to buy the piece. In an interview, Mr. Peters said Mr. Waitt wasn't an "appropriate" buyer, since he didn't appreciate its historical and artistic significance. Mr. Waitt denies that Mr. Peters discouraged the purchase. 

After Mr. Waitt bought the piece, he had his entire collection appraised by Sotheby's, which valued almost all the paintings he bought from Mr. Peters at less than half their purchase prices, Mr. Waitt says. The company said it could not appraise the Seymour painting, given the artist's lack of a sales history.

Mr. Waitt demanded his money back, but Mr. Peters refused, they both say. Mr. Peters said he offered to give Mr. Waitt a credit to buy other works. But Mr. Waitt said the other works offered in return were "not even close in value" to $1.2 million. 

Mr. Waitt sued, claiming breach of contract and negligent misrepresentation. In legal discovery, Mr. Waitt learned that Mr. Peters bought "Buffalo Standing in a River" for $200,000 in 2008. Mr. Peters declined to comment on the price he paid for it. He said he never promised a cash refund and that Mr. Waitt is blaming him for the broader decline in the art market during the recession. 

"We guarantee the title and authenticity, but we can not guarantee what happens in the market," Mr. Peters said. He said the piece is "an exceedingly rare piece of history" and that "$1.2 million is not a lot of money for rare objects in any field." 

A judge in New Mexico state court ruled this month that the case can proceed. Mr. Waitt has since hired an art adviser. "If you're buying art as an investment," he said, "you need a professional who knows what they're doing."

 Write to  Robert Frank at robert.frank@wsj.com 