A former Swiss private banker handed over data on hundreds of offshore bank account holders to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange on Monday, saying he wanted to draw attention to financial abuses.

Rudolf Elmer, 55 years old, headed the office of Julius Baer in the Cayman Islands until he was fired by the bank in 2002. He is scheduled to go on trial in Switzerland on Wednesday over allegations of breaching bank-secrecy rules.

Mr. Elmer handed Mr. Assange the data at a news conference in London. The two yellow and blue discs contain information on around 2,000 banking clients, both individuals and companies, he said, declining to reveal further details on the data. 

"I do think as a banker I have the right to stand up if something is wrong," said Mr. Elmer, who addressed reporters at London's Frontline.

"I am against the system. I know how the system works, and I know the day-to-day business. From that point of view, I wanted to let society know what I know. It is damaging our society," Mr. Elmer said.

WikiLeaks will take at least "a couple of weeks" to vet the data before publishing it, Mr. Assange said. Vetting will be done by themselves, media organizations and other partners to protect sources, he said.

"We have a four-year publishing history. We have never been wrong ... so far as we are aware in relation to anything we have published," said Mr. Assange, who is on bail in Britain and fighting extradition to Sweden where he faces questioning over allegations of sex crimes. WikiLeaks may also hand over some of the material to Britain's Serious Fraud Office, he added.

In 2007 Mr. Elmer became one of the first whistleblowers to use WikiLeaks, which angered U.S. authorities last year by publishing hundreds of secret diplomatic cables it had obtained.

Mr. Assange said the data Mr. Elmer had provided previously about the Cayman Islands revealed "corrupt practices" and "clear asset-hiding." He said he expected similar revelations from the new data.

Julius Baer denounced Elmer for waging a campaign to discredit the bank and its customers.

"After his demands (including financial compensation) in connection with the dismissal could not be satisfied, Mr Elmer embarked in 2004 on a personal intimidation campaign and vendetta against Julius Baer," the bank said in a statement.

"The aim of his activities was and is to discredit Julius Baer as well as clients in the eyes of the public." 

The release data could be a further blow to Switzerland's attempts to maintain its traditional banking secrecy, which protects a client's identity. During the financial crisis repeated attempts by foreign governments to crack down on banking secrecy have weakened the country's secrecy rules.

Mr. Elmer declined to comment on the specifics of his coming trial, but he said that according to his understanding, the banking-secrecy breach charges are unsubstantiated as he had obtained the data from the Cayman Islands. Mr. Elmer is facing up to three years in jail and a fine if he is found guilty. 

 Write to  Goran Mijuk at goran.mijuk@dowjones.com 