 Toyota's share of the global auto market slipped to third place as the company, formerly No. 1 in the industry, was hurt by a stronger yen and the March earthquake that hobbled plants in Japan. The auto maker posted a 77% decline in quarterly profit, largely due to big losses at home. 

 Raj Rajaratnam was convicted on all 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy in the biggest-ever insider-trading case. The judge put the Galleon Group founder on home detention pending sentencing. 

 The Dow Jones Industrials lost 130.33 points, ending a three-day winning streak. The energy sector pulled down stocks as gasoline futures dropped suddenly and oil fell to $98.21 a barrel. 

 Mario Draghi's quest to head the European Central Bank appeared assured after the endorsement of Germany's Angela Merkel. 

 Two lawmakers are set to unveil legislation Thursday to replace Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac with at least five firms that would issue mortgage-backed securities with explicit federal guarantees. 

 An appeals-court panel ruled Moody's Corp., Standard & Poor's and Fitch weren't liable for ratings on mortgage-backed securities that went bad in the housing downturn. 

 Democrats plan Thursday to grill the CEOs of oil majors including Exxon, Chevron and ConocoPhillips about tax breaks the industry gets. 

 HSBC may withdraw from some of the 87 countries where it operates, in a retail retrenchment that is unusual among banks. 

 The U.S. trade deficit widened in March as higher oil prices more than offset growth in exports. 

 Finland backed an aid package for Portugal, clearing the way for European finance ministers to sign off on the deal next week. 

 China Guangdong Nuclear Power dropped its $1.24 billion bid for a big stake in an African uranium deposit. 

 ArcelorMittal posted a 67% jump in earnings and said its output this quarter would be the highest since the recession began. 

 AIG formally unveiled plans for a public offering of 300 million shares, of which 200 million would be sold by the U.S. government. 

 Cisco said profit fell 18% and it would cut more jobs. CEO Chambers predicted weakness into the current quarter. 

 Loretta Fredy Bush, the American CEO of China's Xinhua Finance, was indicted on U.S. fraud charges. 