ABU DHABI—U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she would redouble efforts to increase economic pressure on Iran, despite recent comments by Israeli officials that suggested Tehran's suspected atomic-weapons program could still be at least four years away from producing a bomb.

Washington's top diplomat is touring key Persian Gulf states this week, including the United Arab Emirates, Oman and Qatar, that are central to implementing United Nations-backed financial sanctions against Tehran.

Speaking to reporters en route to the U.A.E., Mrs. Clinton said she will stress to her counterparts that governments should stay focused on denying Iran the ability to deploy nuclear arms rather than become distracted by any timeline concerning Tehran's nuclear advances.

"We have had a consistent message to our friends in the Gulf: that there is no part of the world that has more at stake in trying to deter Iran from becoming the creator and possessor of nuclear weapons than you," Mrs. Clinton said. "We don't want anyone to be misled by anyone's intelligence analysis. This remains a serious concern, and we expect all of our partners who share that concern…to stay as focused as they can." 

Mrs. Clinton spoke a few days after Israel's outgoing spy chief, Meir Dagan, said Iran wouldn't be able to produce an atomic weapon until 2015 at the earliest. He credited international sanctions and covert operations against Iran. Other Israeli officials have made similar comments in recent weeks, dialing back their more aggressive projections that Tehran could have the bomb as early as this year. 

Iran has regularly stated that its nuclear program is only for civilian purposes.

U.S. officials have also privately said they believe international pressure on Iran may be slowing the county's ability to get essential raw materials for its nuclear program. 

A computer virus, called Stuxnet, also attacked Iranian nuclear facilities in recent months, causing the centrifuges that produce nuclear fuel to be temporarily shut down, Western diplomats say.

Mrs. Clinton said she also plans to press Arab countries to further open up their political systems. The renewed push for democratic reforms comes amid what analysts say are growing signs progress has stagnated in parts of the Middle East.

The Obama administration has been criticized by democracy activists over the past two years for failing to push Arab leaders from Cairo to Amman to more aggressively pursue political openness. But the chief American diplomat's mission will be complicated, these analysts say, by recent political and social turmoil engulfing some of Washington's closest strategic partners in the region, including Egypt, Tunisia and Algeria.

Mrs. Clinton and her aides said this week's tour will stress empowering civil society. "We have been very focused on building a system…and making clear that civil society in every country needs to be part of our engagement, as well as more involved by their governments," Mrs. Clinton said.

President George W. Bush had initially made the promotion of democracy the cornerstone of his Mideast policy in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. But that focus diminished significantly during his second term due to resistance from Egypt and Washington's own troubles in Iraq.

On Thursday, Mrs. Clinton will be in Doha, Qatar, to attend the Forum for the Future, a regional conference pairing Arab governments with representatives of the G-8 industrialized countries. The forum, initiated by the Bush administration, has been championed as a venue for bringing together government leaders and the private sector to strengthen democratic institutions in the Arab world.

Mrs. Clinton's trip comes as Washington is growing increasingly concerned about the political paths of some of the region's most important countries.

In Egypt, President Hosni Mubarak's ruling party dominated legislative polls late last year, securing nearly 90% of the elected seats. Opposition political parties charged the vote was fraudulent and a prelude to the 82-year-old Mr. Mubarak winning re-election later this year or passing power to a hand-picked successor. The Egyptian government has denied the elections were flawed.

Cairo's political uncertainty has been compounded by the New Year's bombing of a Coptic Christian church in Alexandria that left 23 people dead. The attack set off rioting in some Christian neighborhoods and spurred calls for Mr. Mubarak's government to do more to protect Egypt's non-Muslim minorities.

Regional analysts have increasingly called on the Obama administration to more publicly press Mr. Mubarak to bring transparency to his country's political transition. They stress that the state of political reforms in Egypt, the Arab world's most populous country, will have significant regional impact. 

"This administration better think fast on how to be taken seriously again in Cairo … and deliver the message so that it matters, with consequences," said Dina Guirguis, a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, a U.S. think tank. 

Mrs. Clinton on Sunday stressed that the State Department has repeatedly pressed Cairo to pursue political reform, but the requests have fallen on deaf ears. "We've said that. We'll continue to say that," Mrs. Clinton said.

U.S. officials have also voiced concerns about the large-scale rioting that has broken out in Tunisia in recent weeks and Algeria in recent days. The unrest has been triggered, in part, by economic issues like price increases and unemployment, but protesters have also called for greater political freedoms.

The State Department last week called in Tunisia's ambassador to Washington to express concerns about his government's handling of the unrest and to discuss reports that Tunis was interfering with the Internet, including Facebook accounts. Mrs. Clinton has made the promotion of Internet freedoms one of her signature initiatives.

"[We] expressed our concern about both what is happening with regard to the demonstrations and … encouraged the Tunisian government to ensure that civil liberties are respected," said a senior State Department official. 

A number of Middle East analysts have praised Mrs. Clinton's increased focus on supporting civil society and the Internet. But they stressed that this can't replace a more public effort by Washington to press Arab governments to pursue reform.

"Civil-society organizations are growing [regionally]. The real problem is with the authoritarian regimes that refuse to allow these groups to operate freely," said Steven Cook, a Mideast analyst at the Council on Foreign Relations. 

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com 