  American Express Co.
AXP


-0.39
%




 has struck a deal to offer discounts to shoppers via Foursquare Labs Inc., the two-year-old start-up that lets users win prizes and meet people by using their mobile phones to "check in" at their favorite bars, restaurants and stores.

The move reflects the credit card company's drive to win over younger consumers and gives Foursquare a heavyweight partner as  Google Inc., AT&T Inc.
T


-0.75
%




 and others jump into the mobile-commerce game.

"You go where your customers are and they are on places like Foursquare," says  Edward Gilligan, vice chairman for AmEx.

Foursquare sees itself as a variant of Facebook or Twitter, but with location thrown in. Its priority is to amass a large base of active users.

The service is built around smartphones, which use GPS and other technologies to keep track of their position. Users who check in frequently can win discounts or recognition. The deal with AmEx opens up another set of incentives for using the service.

Under the arrangement, AmEx customers can register their cards in the Foursquare system to get access to special offers from merchants who are also Foursquare participants. Customers who shop at those merchants with an AmEx card will receive credits and electronic notification that they have redeemed the offer. Merchants who participate in the program would potentially see more sales.

The partners will pilot the service next week in Austin, Texas, at the South by Southwest Interactive Festival, a weeklong conference for technology start-ups. Sixty local merchants will honor the "spend $5, save $5" promotion.

AmEx and Foursquare plan to expand the program to other cities, but don't have a date for going nationwide.

Like the rest of the payments industry, American Express is racing to attract tech-savvy customers who in the future will be making purchases through their mobile phones in addition to the old-fashioned cash register. AmEx customers rang up roughly $100 billion in online transactions last year, and the company's online spending is growing at a rate of 20% versus 15% for its overall spending.

The Foursquare partnership is AmEx's latest offering aimed at people who are roughly a generation younger than the company's traditional customer. AmEx has introduced several new cards targeted at the hip and tech-savvy generation in recent years, with mixed success.

Still, "it's not just about attracting customers who are under 35," Mr. Gilligan said. "This is about AmEx changing the way that we engage our customers."

The partnership also addresses one of Foursquare's most pressing challenges, which is to build loyalty and convince users to check in wherever they go. Foursquare's user base has grown to more than seven million in the past 12 months from just under 500,000. The company is trying to persuade local merchants to offer discounts and deals in an effort to drive traffic.

Foursquare won't make any money off the AmEx discounts, but hopes it will convince a bevy of new merchants to offer deals and encourage more active use of the service.

"A big part of what we're doing is building enhanced loyalty tools," said  Dennis Crowley, the 34-year-old founder and chief executive of Foursquare. "We're seeing that things like this can drive users."

Down the line, Foursquare hopes building up a base of active users will give it options for bringing in revenue, for instance by charging merchants to host discounts or sharing revenue with AmEx or another credit-card company.

This partnership is the first for Foursquare with a company as big as American Express. "We've had these discussions and we haven't had the clout as a company to pull this off before," Mr. Crowley said. "We're starting to become this thing that's mainstream."

 Write to  Robin Sidel at robin.sidel@wsj.com 