MINAMISANRIKU, Miyagi Prefecture, Japan—When a giant tsunami more than 30 feet high crashed into the shores of this quiet fishing village Friday, hundreds, if not thousands, of its residents were swept away. 

With hardly a building now standing in the town's lower basin, Minamisanriku is the focal point of the devastation on Japan's northeastern coast. 

Across Japan, 3,676 are confirmed to have died in Friday's quake and tsunami, the National Police Agency said, and 7,558 were confirmed missing, putting the combined tally past 10,000.

In Minamisanriku alone, nearly half of the town's 17,000 residents are believed missing, and 1,000 dead are identified. 

The living are holed up in cold, chaotic evacuation centers.

Concrete foundations are proof that homes once stood in Minamisanriku. The large office buildings that remain standing are hollowed out, except for the piles of debris washed into shattered windows and doorways.

Local residents walk through the rubble, wide-eyed. Sifting through two-story high mounds of metal siding, logs and snapped power lines, they scrutinize their postapocalyptic landscape for sign of hope.

"They're probably gone," 65-year-old Yumiko Yamauchi said of her two older sisters. Her back is slightly hunched, her legs wobbly. She uses a golf club with a sawed-off head as an improvised cane.

Together with her son and her two grandchildren, Ms. Yamauchi has already gone to all six of the town's major evacuation centers in search of her sisters. Her last hope, she says, is to comb the area near where she thinks the house once stood. She sighed. "There is nothing left," she said. "There is no way they could have survived."

She said she hasn't cried. There is a Japanese phrase shoganai, "it can't be helped."

"It seems strange to say shoganai with something like this, but that's just the way I feel. Shoganai," said Ms. Yamauchi, climbing the steep stairs back up to her house on the mountain, each step supported by her golf-club cane.

On this day in Minamisanriku, where salmon- and seaweed-farming are the staple industries, there were no happy endings. 

While 32-year-old Mika Endo was reunited with her mother Monday, she has also learned that her husband's parents are probably both dead. Clutching her 2-year-old son, Soma, fidgety in the cold, she looks with her mother for family photos in the mud and wreckage of the home where she grew up.

Ms. Endo and her husband identified her father-in-law in one of Minamisanriku's makeshift morgues. "An acquaintance of mine saw my mother-in-law get washed away," Ms. Endo recounted. She said the body has yet to be found.

Tomoko Haga, another resident of the area, spent three nights stranded with her elderly in-laws on the second floor of her home in a neighboring town. Exhausted, the 56-year-old Ms. Haga made her way through the debris on her way to the evacuation center to look for her 89-year-old mother and 52-year-old brother.

Her in-laws refused to flee as tsunami warnings sounded, she said. She says the family fled upstairs to avoid the rushing waters. As they waited, stranded, Ms. Haga said she would hear the helicopters of Japan's Self Defense Forces. She says she waved frantically but they didn't come. 

Eventually, thanks to a neighbor who pleaded with them to find Ms. Haga's family, the helicopters arrived. Ms. Haga's parents-in-law were too weak to leave on their own and were airlifted out. Ms. Haga says her blood pressure plunged from the stress of the ordeal, and she went unconscious.

A day later, wearing five sweaters, she is walking amid Minamisanrika's rubble, looking for her mother and brother, who lived a few hundred meters from the water. "I am very, very worried," she said.

On higher land, the town has turned the Bayside Super Arena, a 900-seat sports and entertainment facility opened in 1998, into the main evacuation center and morgue. The arena's dim corridors overflow; 800 people shelter here. 

In one corner of the lobby area, 200 mostly elderly people wait in line to see a doctor for prescription medicine. The line started gathering hours before the announced medicine-distribution time. One woman collapsed and needed to be wheeled to the infirmary, located in a weightlifting room where exercise machines have been pushed aside to let patients rest on mats.

For the first time since the earthquake struck, the town got phone service and laid out eight phones. Each person was allowed a single one-minute call. 

In the entranceway, officials had a list of 60 deceased. All but three had been identified by the police, using their wallets or other forms of ID. One unidentified body, the list said, was a woman between 40 years old and 60 years old. She was found on the west side of a local retirement home in an apron, carrying a mobile phone with a Snoopy strap.

A couple in their 50s pored over the list. The man looked down the names and then said flatly, "there it is." He walked over to a young male staff member and said: "We found a name on the list." 

The young man appeared confused. "You found what?" he asked.

The man leaned into his wife, and said: "I found a name on the death list." He was whisked away to a back room.

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 