LISBON—The future of Portuguese Prime Minister José Socrates hangs in the balance, as the outcome of an austerity vote could lead to his resignation and push the government closer to a financial bailout by the European Union and International Monetary Fund. 

Legislators will vote Wednesday on a series of new austerity measures unveiled earlier this month by the government, which said the plan is needed to cut the budget deficit and regain the confidence of bond investors. 

The main opposition parties plan to vote against those measures. Mr. Socrates, in turn, has said he will quit if that happens. 

Should Mr. Socrates step down, it would take at least two months for elections to be held. Opinion polls indicate the leader of the main opposition party, the center-right Social Democrats, may emerge as the winner. 

The political crisis comes at a delicate time. Portugal faces repayments of €4.23 billion ($6.02 billion) in debt next month. Uncertainty about the course of economic policy ahead of an election would likely increase Portugal's already high borrowing costs, and make it more difficult to avoid a bailout. 

In an effort to soothe international investors, the opposition Social Democrats said in a letter that although it doesn't back the government, it supports Portugal's efforts to reduce its budget deficit to current targets. 

The party, however, has yet to disclose proposed measures. Without such details, investors are unlikely to be reassured. 

"What counts at the end of the day is that we should have a package of measures that should allow the country to meet all its objectives... and to persuade all the participants on the markets," said Amadeu Altafaj Tardio, spokesman for the European Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs. 

Mr. Socrates has led a minority government since 2009, and has relied on opposition parties to implement austerity plans to cut the budget deficit to 4.6% of gross domestic product this year, from about 7% last year. 

But the opposition has balked at the latest measures, which include unpopular cuts to programs supporting home ownership and the elimination of more than 900 midlevel positions in the public sector. 

Opposition parties, including the Social Democrats, have said the new measures will push the country further into a recession, a charge the government appears to accept. It has forecast the economy will contract by 0.9% this year, having previously projected it would grow by 0.2%. 

Pedro Passos Coelho, the leader of the Social Democrats, has accused the government of being too slow to react to the fiscal crisis, and has criticized Mr. Socrates for failing to inform President Aníbal Cavaco Silva of the new austerity measures before revealing them at a summit of euro-zone leaders on March 11. 

The Social Democrats and the Social Center Democrats together control 100 seats in Parliament, out of a total of 228, while Mr. Socrates's party has 97 legislators.The government doesn't require Parliament's approval to implement the new austerity measures. However, Mr. Socrates said last week in a television interview that he would quit if he fails to garner legislative support. 

Investors would likely see that as a setback for a country that has struggled for months to lower its funding costs. 

So far this year, Portugal has sold around €7 billion in bonds, out of an annual target ranging from €18 billion to €20 billion. The debt auctions came at a high cost for the country, with investors demanding interest rates above 7% for 10-year bonds, a level that even the government sees as unsustainable in the medium term. 

 Write to  Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com 