 Q: I did not claim a teacher tax credit on my taxes last year. Was it automatically applied because I am a teacher? If not, is there any way to claim it for that year? Thanks for any insight on this. 

 --H.L.E., Los Angeles 

A: I assume you are referring to the Educator Expense Deduction of as much as $250 a year. It's available for millions of teachers and other educators who spend money out of their own pockets for classroom supplies, such as books and computer equipment.

This break expired at the end of 2009 but was resurrected by a law enacted late last year. That law revived this provison retroactively to the beginning of 2010.

In response to your questions: No, that deduction isn't "automatically applied" because you are a teacher. Not all teachers are eligible.

But if you were eligible for 2009 and didn't claim it, there is an easy solution. Just file what is known as an "amended" return for that year. Use Form 1040X. It's available on the Internal Revenue Service's website (www.irs.gov).

There's no need to rush. The general rule is you have to file your claim for a credit or refund within three years following the date you filed your original return, or within two years after the date you paid the tax, whichever is later, according to IRS Publication 17.

On Form 1040X, you are supposed to enter your income, deductions, and credits as you originally reported them on your return, any changes you're making and the corrected amounts, according to the IRS. Then calculate the tax on the corrected amount of taxable income and the amount you owe, or the amount of your refund. For more details, see Publication 17.

But before you start on that amended return, make sure you qualify for this deduction.

The educator-expenses deduction applies to elementary- and secondary-school teachers, instructors, counselors, principals or aides. To qualify, you must have worked at least 900 hours during a school year. You can claim it even if you don't itemize your deductions on Schedule A.

For the 2008 tax year, around 3.8 million tax returns reported this deduction, up slightly from the prior year, according to an article in the IRS's Statistics of Income Bulletin. The dollar amount of deductions totaled about $947 million.

—Send your questions to us at askdowjones.sunday03@wsj.com and include your name, address and telephone number. Questions may be edited; we regret that we cannot answer every letter.