With a record-busting crest heading south on the Mississippi River, communities in Arkansas and Mississippi braced for flooding Thursday even as water levels dropped near where a third and final hole was blasted in a Missouri levee.

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers blew a nearly two-mile-wide hole in the levee Monday night, diverting water into a floodway and dropping the water level at Cairo, Ill. 

But that dramatic action did not ease the threat of flooding further south.

President Barack Obama declared disaster areas in 11 Mississippi counties expected to face serious problems from the flood.

Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour said the declaration would help authorities at all levels work together to handle a "monumental flood," with water expected to crest in places like Natchez, Miss., at six feet above decades-old records.

In Arkansas, officials closed the westbound lanes of a 23-mile stretch of Interstate 40, a major trucking route, amid flooding on the White River, and they expected to have to close the eastbound lanes by Thursday night, said Ralph Hall, assistant to the director of the Arkansas State Highway and Transportation Department. The river is expected to crest Monday, meaning the closure would likely last into next week.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

Detours will lengthen trips through the area by two to three hours, Mr. Hall said, adding: "The truck traffic is backing up real badly right now."

The Corps has said it might need to operate three additional floodways in Louisiana as the high water moves south. All open with gates, however, so the Corps won't need to set off any more explosions.

Forty miles south of the Missouri floodway, in Caruthersville, Mo., the river was already at 47 feet Thursday, a foot above its 1937 record, according to Charles Davis, an engineer for the St. Francis Levee District.

Caruthersville, a town of about 7,000, has a concrete flood wall reinforced with steel pilings designed to protect it from a flood that reaches 50 feet. The National Weather Service expects the flood to crest at 49.5 feet on Sunday.

Missouri National Guard troops have been working 12 to 14 hours a day since Wednesday to construct a temporary levee of sandbags, dirt and gravel inside the floodwall to catch any water that spills over the top.

"Some people are panicking, some are packing up and leaving," Mr. Davis said. "A lot of people are making preparations to sandbag their homes, and businesses are doing the same thing."

The Corps of Engineers had run out of explosives after opening the initial gap at the northern end of the Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway, then blowing an exit hole to the south. The third and final hole, also at the bottom of the floodway, was completed Thursday afternoon.

The floodway is expected to carry about a quarter of the Mississippi's flow over rich farmlands for about 35 miles before returning it to the main channel of the river.

The state of Missouri had fought the plan all the way to the Supreme Court, but Justice Samuel Alito on Sunday night found no reason to stop the Corps from exercising the plan designed after the great flood of 1927.

On Tuesday, a group of farmers filed a lawsuit seeking class-action status, arguing the Corps had wrongfully taken their lands. 

Some scientists have also said that running water over the Missouri floodway and others in Louisiana could stir up more than the usual amount of agricultural fertilizer, contributing to a summertime depletion of oxygen in the Gulf of Mexico, posing a threat to marine life. 

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com and Jeffrey Ball at jeffrey.ball@wsj.com 