SYDNEY—Flash floods tore through the center of the Australian town of Toowoomba on Monday, sweeping away cars and killing one woman, as severe thunderstorms compounded record flooding that has swept over the country's east coast and hinterland over the past month. 

Australia's Bureau of Meteorology warned that heavy rains and thunderstorms would continue over two stretches of land inland from the sugar mill town of Bundaberg and southeast of the Gulf of Carpentaria in Queensland state, leading to localized flash floods and worsening river flooding. 

Queensland police advised residents of Toowoomba to stay indoors after five cars were swept away by floodwaters and landslides were reported on the New England Highway near the town. 

The floods have caused an estimated 5 billion Australian dollars (US$4.94 billion) in damage and lost productivity so far as they have swept down the coast of Queensland, hitting mines accounting for 40% of the global supply of the coking coal used in steelmaking and cutting Queensland's expected 2011 economic output growth from above 3.5% to below 3.0%. 

Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard on Monday promised that the country would return to a budget surplus by 2013 regardless of the impact of the weather but warned that the target would not be easy to meet. 

"That will require us to make some hard choices and we will make those hard choices. I can't, at this stage, tell people what the total cost of recovering from these floods is going to be because I can't predict the draw down on infrastructure money until we see what's under the flood waters and how much damage has been done," she said. 

"I can't know whether a bridge has been washed away until we can see the bridge again. I can't know how much damage is being done to a road by floodwaters until the floodwaters subside and ... people can get out there and test the road." 

Westpac Banking Corp. estimated that the floods would shave 0.25% off Australia's gross domestic product in the year to July 2011, although this would be spread across the last quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 2011. 

Australian Minister for Human Services Tanya Plibersek said that A$10 million had already been paid out to flood victims in 8,000 separate claims. 

At Dalrymple Bay Coal Terminal, the world's biggest coking coal port, Chief Executive Greg Smith said that just four ships in the offshore queue had been matched to deliveries of coal coming down the train line from inland mines, suggesting thin exports of the steelmaking commodity in coming days. 

"Four ships have cargoes that are available but the rest is just dead weight, waiting for cargoes to become available," he said. "Four ships is about two days of loading at current rates." 

Energy analysts Wood Mackenzie warned last week that stockpiles could run down as soon as next week, imposing a much more severe production squeeze as miners will be dependent on production from waterlogged mine sites. 

Dalrymple Bay traditionally has around 50 ships at anchor offshore. In normal times, the majority of ships are matched with coal deliveries due to arrive in port but the flooding in Queensland's mining belt has reversed that picture. 

"They've been assigned cargoes but the cargoes are unavailable at this stage," said Mr. Smith. Four more ships were due to arrive over the coming week and around 15 by the start of February, compared with a typical monthly average of 50 to 60 ships. 