Architect Hugh Hardy restored the gold-leaf glory of Radio City Music Hall in 1999, returned Bryant Park from dereliction to Parisian-style elegance and spurred the revival of 42nd Street by reincarnating the New Victory Theater and the New Amsterdam. Now, at 78, he is working on three new theaters—two of them in Brooklyn and all with seats for fewer than 300 people—in hopes of getting a new generation as hooked on New York theater as he has always been.

A natural showboat with a big smile and limber Dick Van Dyke gait, Mr. Hardy traces his love of the theater to when he'd travel as a teenager from Westchester to catch everything from Rodgers & Hammerstein musicals to "Death of a Salesman." "It's hard to appreciate what a revolution all that was, and how contemporary and exciting," he said in his office earlier this month. 

While he studied architecture at Princeton, his hero was set designer Jo Mielziner, a Broadway fixture with a hand in almost every major production of the day. Mr. Mielziner hired Mr. Hardy to work on Lincoln Center's Vivian Beaumont Theater with its architect, Eero Saarinen, who was then at the height of his powers, having designed the Gateway Arch in St. Louis and the winged TWA terminal at JFK International Airport. 

Mr. Hardy had to mediate between the two mid-century legends in a disagreement over whether to give the 1,000-seat Vivian Beaumont a traditional proscenium or a modern thrust stage. Mimicking the Finnish-émigré architect's accent, Mr. Hardy re-enacted Mr. Saarinen's constant calls: "He had a Very. Deliberate. Voice." 

The result was a stage shaped unlike any other. And Mr. Hardy was launched as a can-do architect, first at Hugh Hardy & Associates, then at Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer and, since 2004, at H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture, designing along the way many more theaters, but also the National Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., a federal courthouse in Jackson, Miss., and the Santa Fe Opera House.

In 2009, Lincoln Center decided to add a small theater geared toward young up-and-comers, both as creators and audience members. The roof of the Vivian Beaumont seemed the only place to put it, and Mr. Hardy the only architect to design it. "Hugh brings to it a greater knowledge than any architect who doesn't go to plays. And that's a big deal," said André Bishop, artistic director of Lincoln Center Theater, which is overseeing the planned Claire Tow Theater. "And if there were any arguments, he could say, 'I was there.'"

About a year from completion, the Tow perches atop the Vivian Beaumont, hugging the stage tower that was never clad in the travertine of the rest of the building because money ran out. A compressed glass box shielded by a screen of white rods, the Tow will have a large lobby and a 131-seat theater. In front, a green lawn should be in sync with the center's gambit to offer a more informal and inviting experience for Lincoln Center newbies. Cheaper tickets are part of the campaign, too.

Mr. Hardy also has a long relationship with the Brooklyn Academy of Music, having worked on restorations and updates of the 1908 building since 1987. He is now adding the Richard B. Fisher Building, which will sprout from the shell of a 1928 Salvation Army hall adjacent to BAM. The new six-story building will house a highly flexible theater with 250 seats and no separation between stage and audience. Architecturally, the textured-red-brick structure, funded by the city's Economic Development Corporation and the Department of Cultural Affairs, blends politely with BAM and Brooklyn. "We started out with some wonderfully nutso ideas, but nobody would support it," Mr. Hardy said.

At the Theatre for a New Audience (TFANA), also to be part of the "BAM Cultural District," there was a chance to make a bolder statement. Aiming to use a material as distinct as possible from the masonry buildings of downtown Brooklyn, Mr. Hardy opted for "the shiniest and darkest metal we could find." The front facade will be of glass hung in channels from the roof, reaching down to a lower edge that is canted up to allow a wedge of outdoor plaza where playgoers and public can mingle. One story above ground level, the 299-seat theater is a modified black box with three tiers of gallery seating, a design modeled on the National Theatre's highly flexible Cottesloe in London. "I don't want to say it's a copy, but it is directly influenced," Mr. Hardy said. Mayor Michael Bloomberg is expected to announce in April that TFANA will receive a big financial boost from the Economic Development Corporation for construction.

Even as he is shopping a manuscript about his experiences with theater-making and theater-going, Mr. Hardy protests that he does not want to be associated only with theater design. "I am an architect, first," he said. The current work in his office ranges from a botanical research institute in Texas to the Maritime & Seafood Industry Museum in Biloxi, Miss. Traveling across the country, TFANA's chairman, Ted Rogers, visited a library and, he said in a phone interview, "I felt, I know this building—the color, the imaginative design of the stair. The way it all beckons you to a place you want to go. I knew there was only one person who could have designed it."

He asked, and he was right.