With the Year of the Rabbit just days away, the Hong Kong movie industry is making final preparations for an annual tradition—the Chinese New Year comedy.

These popular films—a unique Hong Kong genre for the new-year holiday—have a simple formula: an all-star cast, madcap antics, music and a happy ending. 

The dialogue and gags usually play on knowledge of Hong Kong culture and current events, and the stars often poke fun at their public personas. For instance, in "All's Well Ends Well 2011"—the latest in a long holiday series—martial-arts star Donnie Yen sends up his hero image by playing a makeup artist who operates at the same lightning speed as a kung-fu master.

The jokes are often crass but never mean-spirited, and the movies aim to be suitable for grandparents and children alike.

"We must make a family picture," says Raymond Wong, a veteran of more than 30 years in the Hong Kong movie scene and the producer of the "All's Well Ends Well" series.

Fiona Law, who teaches a class on Hong Kong cinema at the University of Hong Kong and has done extensive research on the phenomenon of the Chinese New Year movie, says the first known example was "Bloom and Prosper," a 1937 comedy from mainland director Tang Xiaodan. No copy is believed to survive, but Ms. Law says it involves a familiar theme for the genre: winning the lottery and easy fortune. 

Over the decades, she says, the New Year practice of going to the movies "was a very important family event," and in keeping with the family-oriented holiday. Today, the ritual brings "a sense of belonging. They are a cultural memory."

Indeed, Mr. Wong recalls from his 1960s childhood that his parents went to the cinema only once a year—during the Lunar New Year—and the movie had to have two elements: well-known stars and lots of laughs.

Another prime example of this genre is 1993's "The Eagle Shooting Heroes," from director Jeffrey Lau and producer Wong Kar-wai. A wild parody of 1960s martial-arts movies, it features an A-list cast hamming things up big-time: Jacky Cheung, Leslie Cheung, Maggie Cheung, Carina Lau, Brigitte Lin and the two Tony Leungs—Tony Leung Chiu-wai and Tony Leung Ka-fai. 

The spoofs of martial-arts movies "are nostalgic elements," says Ms. Law, and in Hong Kong, the audience gets the jokes.

This year audiences will find three comedies at the cineplex: "Mr. & Mrs. Incredible," starring Sandra Ng and Louis Koo, a family-comedy that strays from the genre a little in that it doesn't mention the new-year holiday; "I Love Hong Kong" with Eric Tsang, Aarif Lee, Sandra Ng (yes, she's in two), and a pack of other familiar faces; and, of course, "All's Well Ends Well 2011," the sixth entry in the series that began nearly 20 years ago.

Many studios typically have rolled out their big movies of the year during the Lunar New Year, but recent shifts in the movie-going public — particularly the growing importance of the mainland China market — mean that other holiday periods, such as the Oct. 1 National Day holiday, are now just as important.

Not all movies released during the Lunar New Year are comedies. Starting in the 1990s, Jackie Chan often took advantage of the season's large audiences to release his action films, even though the plots had little to do with the holiday. This New Year will bring the release of the martial-arts action-drama "Shaolin," which stars Mr. Chan, Andy Lau, Nicholas Tse and Fan Bing Bing; Benny Chan directed.

In recent years, as other forms of entertainment such as video games and iPods have become more popular, Chinese New Year movies haven't had the same social impact. And Hong Kong movies now have to consider audiences in mainland China, where they also are widely distributed, and the jokes have to be tailored differently.

But the plots of Chinese New Year movies today still center around family and romance. And above all, says Mr. Wong, the script must include the traditional Chinese New Year greeting: "Kung hei fat choi."

 Write to  Dean Napolitano at dean.napolitano@wsj.com 