Municipal-bond brokers are scrambling to document how they share information with retail investors in the wake of a regulator's request that they provide detailed explanations before making a trade. 

Many brokers have bristled at the request, and some have gone as far as to say that they may stop trading municipal bonds for individual clients if the process proves burdensome. 

"The unintended consequences of increased regulation is broker-dealers curtailing or leaving aspects of the retail business," says  Mike Nicholas, chief executive of the Bond Dealers of America, a Washington-based trade association for U.S. fixed-income brokers.

The upshot: Some brokers say it may become more difficult to trade certain bonds, which could affect liquidity and prices. 

The tough talk may be more bark than bite, but it illustrates the degree to which the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority's seven-page "checklist for customer disclosure" has riled the industry. Finra says the checklist, which includes explaining how and when a bond's interest will be paid and discussing default risk, isn't a requirement but a reminder that firms should have procedures to review relevant facts with retail clients. 

Yet many municipal-broker firms are concerned that some version of the checklist could eventually be required. 

While better disclosure is a perennial demand from municipal-bond industry regulators, it has become more of an industry focal point recently because of the downgrades of many municipal-bond insurers since the financial crisis. That has made such insurance less common—and caused investors to be more attuned to risk. 

Finra originally published the checklist in September, but many firms are just now grappling with implementation. The Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association says the checklist has caused "compliance nightmares," prompting the New York-based trade group to hire additional attorneys to better understand its intent.

All this comes amid improving muni-bond prices in recent weeks. Yields on a benchmark of highly rated 10-year general-obligation bonds had fallen to 2.74% as of Thursday from 3.21% at the start of the year, according to Thomson Reuters. But some analysts and bankers attribute the stability to a lack of supply, and say it doesn't necessarily signal the market's return to health. 

Some in the municipal industry say dealers have no reason to complain about Finra's request: Starting in 1984, they have been required by the industry's self-regulator, the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, to disclose material facts about a municipal bond to a retail client at the time of the trade. 

"Dealers have blown that off over the last 20 or 25 years," says  Christopher "Kit" Taylor, a financial-industry consultant and the board's former head. 

Municipal-bond dealers say they always have shared material facts about bonds with retail clients. But Finra's checklist is too extensive, they say. Finra recommends, for instance, that brokers talk about bond pricing with customers, explain why a security is priced above or below its par value, and discuss the inverse relationship between price and yield as well as long-term interest-rate risk. 

"No one is going to fill out a seven-page questionnaire to sell a bond," says  Chris Melton, executive vice president of Coastal Securities Inc. in Houston. "By the time you've finished going through all you have to go through, someone has already sold the bonds," he says, particularly those with the highest yields. 

Coastal Securities is in the midst of updating its procedures to formalize what its brokers already discuss with clients, Mr. Melton says, to prove the firm follows existing requirements. 

In recent weeks, Crews & Associates Inc., a fixed-income firm in Little Rock, Ark., began requiring its brokers to mark on an online internal form that they have researched the security on the Electronic Municipal Market Access website before buying or selling, says  Don Winton, the firm's chief operating officer. The site gathers key securities information, such as a credit-rating change or new financial documents published by a local government. 

While Crews's brokers have discussed pertinent bond information with retail clients, "there was not an evidentiary process in place so that when examiners walked in the firm could say, 'This is what we're doing,'" Mr. Winton says.

 Write to  Jeannette Neumann at jeannette.neumann@wsj.com 