LONDON— Standard Chartered
STAN


-0.39
%




 PLC posted a record net profit for 2010, driven by increased wholesale income and a sharp reduction in loan-impairment charges, and forecast continued double-digit income growth for 2011.

The U.K.-based, Asia-focused lender said India became the biggest contributor to the bank's pretax profit last year, with $1.2 billion, outstripping Hong Kong's $1.1 billion pretax profit. Middle East pretax profit more than doubled, to $841 million from $366 million, amid a sharp fall in bad loans.

Overall, net profit rose 29% in 2010 to a record $4.23 billion from $3.28 billion a year earlier, while total operating income was $16.1 billion, up 5.8% from $15.2 billion in 2009. Loan-impairment charges dropped 56% to $883 million from $2 billion, with wholesale income increasing in key regions, including India and Hong Kong.

Chief Executive  Peter Sands called regulation the bank's "biggest external challenge" and estimated a new U.K. levy on large banks' balance sheets will cost it about $180 million after tax this year. The government introduced the charge in January, with an aim of raising £2.5 billion ($4.06 billion) a year from the largest domestic and foreign banks operating in the country.

Mr. Sands said the bank has started 2011 with good momentum and volume growth in both wholesale and consumer banking.

He said earnings and return on equity this year will reflect that momentum, but that dilution from last year's $5.2 billion rights issue and the U.K. levy will have an impact. The bank said it expects double-digit income growth this year despite a cautious forecast for the world economy and the increased regulatory costs.

Regardless, Mr. Sands said the return-on-equity target remains "in the mid-teens." The figure for 2010 was 14.1%.

Some banks, including  Credit Suisse Group and  HSBC HoldingsPLC have recently cut their return-on-equity forecasts, mainly to reflect higher regulatory charges. Banks across the world are having to hold more capital against their assets, while at the same time facing higher funding costs in the wake of the financial crisis.

  Ian Gordon, an analyst at Exane BNP Paribas, said the results were "like a breath of fresh air" after disappointing figures and forecasts from most of Standard Chartered's U.K. peers. He said he expects the bank's main markets of Hong Kong, India, Singapore and Korea to be the primary drivers of growth in pretax profit this year and next.

Standard Chartered's shares rose 4.3% in London, outpacing a weak market.

The bank said one of its goals in India is to expand its distribution beyond its 94 branches. It noted that income in Hong Kong climbed 13% in the second half of the year over the first half, culminating with a record fourth quarter.

Finance Director  Richard Meddings said the bank hasn't set a target for its Tier 1 capital ratio—a measure of a bank's capital relative to its assets—but that it aims to "stay above the fray" as regulatory charges rise. Standard Chartered estimates coming Basel III rules will cut about one percentage point from the current ratio of 11.8%.

"We want to make sure that we have capital to meet that while having sufficient capital to continue to grow with our customers," Mr. Meddings said.

Standard Chartered's costs increased 13% in the year, a rise that included $150 million in direct regulatory and compliance costs. Staff costs also rose as part of the bank's investment program, with about 7,000 employees added during 2010 as part of its expansion in consumer banking and infrastructure.

Mr. Meddings said cost growth should fall back into line with income growth this year, and that net new staff added this year should fall to below 1,000.

 Write to  Margot Patrick at margot.patrick@dowjones.com 