The debate about boosting the effectiveness of the euro zone's main government bailout fund now appears likely to extend well into March. Germany, the fund's paymaster-in-chief, seems willing to consider new ideas for the fund, but at a price—tougher reforms from beneficiary governments aimed at improving the long-term health of their struggling economies.

The idea that gathered most attention this week has been the suggestion that the fund, the European Financial Stability Facility, could lend money to troubled governments to help them buy back their own bonds.

Because of worries about possible future defaults or restructurings, most bonds of Greece, Ireland and Portugal are trading at deep discounts to their face value. The idea would be to harvest those discounts for the benefit of the governments, which would extinguish the bonds and thereby lower their debt and interest payment burdens. 

This proposal has gained ground over a related idea that the EFSF should buy the bonds itself. In an interview with Dow Jones Newswires that appears also to reflect the views of Germany, Dutch Finance Minister Jan Kees de Jager said this week that the direct buybacks appear to be in violation of EU treaties. "So I don't see it as a viable option."

Better, say some European officials, for governments to take over the responsibility for buying back their own bonds, than having the fund become the owner.

Such debt buybacks have a pedigree. In Latin America during the late 1980s, attention was focused on the ways government debts could be lowered by formal debt swap mechanisms, such as debt-for-equity swaps. But before many of these formal programs got into full swing, countries such as Brazil and Mexico were making informal purchases of debt at deep discounts to face value.

These purchases were carried out quietly in the secondary market. This meant there was no sharp rise in debt market prices that would have reduced discounts and lowered the benefits to the debtor country. There were willing sellers because the holders of these debts—the banks extending the loans in the first place—had already written them down. They set aside reserves for likely losses that were bigger than discounts implied by market prices. When they sold, the difference flowed back into profits.

In Europe now, many holders of European government bonds are euro-zone banks, whose financial weakness may discourage them from writing down the value of bonds they hold. Their inclination is to hold them to maturity and hope there is no default.

But the European Central Bank, which as of last week held €76 billion ($102 billion) of government bonds issued by Greece, Ireland and Portugal, has no such constraint. If Greece, for example, bought bonds from the ECB, it could do it without affecting market prices.

Cutting debt could be an important factor in reviving growth. Latin America's 1980s travails led to "debt overhang" theories. If a country's debts were so high as to raise questions about future repayments, that would act as a constraint on investment, and therefore growth. 

Investors shy away from high-debt countries for fear that foreign creditors are going to absorb too much of a country's future income—or that their investments would be at risk in a future default. Debt overhangs also mean that debt holders could increase the value of their debt by accepting debt writedowns. That's because the debt burden would fall, investment and growth would rise and a country's ability to pay would therefore be enhanced.

How much could debt buybacks help, say, Greece? The ECB doesn't break down its bond holdings, and we don't know their maturity profile either, but though it's guesswork, it may be instructive.

Market yields of 10-year Greek bonds Thursday were about 11.5%, too high for Greece to borrow. But that high interest rate translates into discounts to the bonds' face value, of about a third. If the ECB holds, say €50 billion face value of Greek bonds and Athens buys them, it would cut about €15 billion from government debt. 

Such reductions are not to be sneezed at. But given Greece's government debt burden now stands at €325 billion, they do not appear on their own to be a solution to a debt burden that stands at 140% of GDP and is still growing. Greece could vacuum up more bonds in the secondary market—but even in the unlikely event that it could buy back its entire debt at a 30% discount, its debt would still be equivalent to 100% of annual economic output.

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 