MADRID – Spanish police said Tuesday Alberto Leon, a former cyclist and a key suspect in the largest anti-doping probe in recent Spanish sports history, was found dead Monday in a house outside Madrid, the result of an apparent suicide.

Mr. Leon, who was accused of distributing doping products for a number of sports coaches and athletes on behalf of the alleged ringleader of a major doping network, Eufemiano Fuentes, apparently hung himself after leaving a note for his estranged wife, a police spokeswoman said.

Last month, Mr. Leon was cited – together with Mr. Fuentes and Mr. Fuentes's sister Yolanda – as being at the center of a network involving a number of track-and-field athletes, a novelty in a country where doping probes have almost exclusively targeted cyclists. A lawyer for Mr. Fuentes said Mr. Fuentes claims to be innocent of the charges. Mr. Leon and 12 others, including Marta Dominguez, a world steeplechase champion and the vice president of the country's athletics federation, were arrested as part of a probe codenamed Operacion Galgo.

The probe found illegal drugs, blood bags and equipment used for illegal blood transfusions, exposing a widespread doping system in Spain that has also provided doping products for athletes and coaches in the country and abroad.

The police said the Fuentes siblings and Mr. Leon were often contacted by sports coaches who kept them informed about schedules for sports events, and then crafted doping plans for the athletes, using banned drugs such as anabolic steroids and erythropoietin, a hormone used to boost red blood-cell production.

Operacion Galgo represents the latest effort to clean up Spanish sports, often hit by doping allegations in recent years. Like Eufemiano Fuentes, Mr. Leon was briefly detained as part of the 2006 Operacion Puerto, a probe that exposed widespread doping in cycling but failed to put an end to a practice believed to be still rampant in cycling and other sports.

 Write to  David Roman at David.Roman@dowjones.com 