Mention the name Steinway and the first thing that comes to mind will likely be the graceful ebony instrument that occupies most of the world's great concert stages. However, there was a family behind the piano brand, and its members played important roles in American history that can still surprise and fascinate. When the Smithsonian Institution learned that one of this dynasty's central characters, William Steinway (1835-1896), recorded his experiences of 36 years in a near-daily diary—with eyewitness accounts of events that ranged from New York's Civil War riots of 1863 ("Row of buildings on Third Ave. burning down. . . . Charles gave the ringleaders $30-40 [to protect the factory]. . . . All business in the upper part of the city suspended, Negroes chased everywhere & killed when caught") to the 1890 political machinations that made possible the city's rapid-transit system—the museum set about putting all 2,500 pages online. (The results can be found at http://americanhistory.si.edu/steinway/diary.) Visitors to Washington can also see the supplementary exhibit, "A Gateway to the 19th Century: The William Steinway Diary, 1861-1896" at the National Museum of American History.

The museum's curators and editors worked with more than 100 volunteers to reach the project's current stage. It hasn't been easy. "This is one of the Smithsonian's longest-running, largest volunteer efforts in our history," the project's managing editor, Anna Karvellas, says.

"I think of it as 'the little engine that could,'" she adds. "It began with Cynthia Hoover, Curator Emeritus of Musical Instruments, who obtained the diary from Henry Ziegler Steinway, and Edwin M. Good, who transcribed it from William's hand. The manuscript, as well as a separate business diary, now largely lost, had been passed down to Theodore, William's son—who added annotations to mark important moments—and then to Theodore's son, Henry." Thus the document became a sort of Steinway-clan life handbook.

"I first saw the diary in 1966, among various Steinway papers," Ms. Hoover recalls, "and I urged the family to keep it safe. It was such an ordinary part of their lives that Henry would take it on the bus when he went to work, or lend out a volume to a graduate student. Through the years we built up a relationship. And about the time in 1980 when Henry retired from the factory, I convinced him to have it microfilmed. Coincidentally, Edwin Good, who had written a book on early pianos, expressed interest in creating an edited version."

Some of the material is so personal that there well might have been concerns about releasing it. The diary begins three days before William's marriage to his first wife, Regina Roos. William was breathless with excitement, and the first page is labeled "Daily Diary of Wm. Steinway and wife!" Sixteen years later, an entry records that "both my wife and myself are seized with the wildest paroxysms of grief" as the relationship dissolved, following the revelation of her numerous adulterous affairs. "He writes of his mother holding him as he sobbed," Ms. Karvellas reports. But, she says, the family decided to let history stand. "Henry," she explains, "took the position that 'the truth is the truth.'"

The notations are usually brief and sometimes cryptic, but often spellbinding. There are references to great artists: "William couldn't believe how Paderewski blew through money," Ms. Karvellas says of the electrifying piano virtuoso and Polish political leader. "They gave him a huge sum to come over, and by the time he arrived it was already gone." But much of the story involves Steinway's efforts to advance his dream of developing Queens into a Utopian home for his workers. "He bought this land in Astoria," she reports, "which was pretty bucolic then. At the time there were only 45,000 people in Queens. He wanted to get away from the unions and the anarchists, and he needed to get his people there. So he built housing, and an amusement park where La Guardia Airport now sits, and a school. He developed an elaborate horse-car railroad system, and it made him a natural for appointment, by Mayor [Hugh J.] Grant, to head the committee to develop the blueprint for the New York City subway system. He was obsessed with connecting Manhattan to Queens. So, in addition to the Steinway tunnel, which is still used by trains traveling between the two boroughs, he spent 23 years trying to get a bridge built over the East River. 

"He really wanted to develop a better life for his people, and he was very hands-on about it. He was out there in the marshes in his rubber boots, doing the surveying and planting trees." And the diary traces it all.

Yet much work still needs to be done. "It's really just the beginning," says Ms. Karvellas. "It would be a shame if we couldn't share all of the thousands of annotations we've developed" to deepen the connections between the entries. "Hopefully we'll be able to partner with the right group or find a donor to continue the project, so that the diary can become an even greater historical resource."

 Mr. Isacoff is on the faculties of the Purchase College Conservatories of Music and Dance (SUNY). 