KABUL—A coalition air strike killed seven civilians, including three children, Afghan officials said Saturday, in the newest such incident to poison relations between the U.S.-led forces and the Afghan government. 

The coalition's helicopter strike occurred Friday night in the Now Zad district of Helmand province, according to a statement from the provincial governor. Friday's operation, which targeted a Taliban leader, resulted in killing only civilians, the governor said. 

A U.S.-led coalition statement earlier Saturday said an investigation was under way after an unspecified number of civilian bodies were found at the site of an air strike targeting two vehicles reported to be carrying Taliban fighters. 

A coalition spokesman wouldn't confirm the seven fatalities reported by the Helmand governor or discuss whether any insurgents were killed in the strike. 

The civilian deaths in Helmand are the latest in a string of coalition air strikes that went awry this month. Since the beginning of March, U.S.-led forces mistakenly killed some 20 Afghans, including nine children who died in a strike earlier this month. On Wednesday, two Afghans were killed in eastern Khost province.

The strikes have spurred public anger and rocked an already tumultuous relationship with Afghan President Hamid Karzai. 

Following the strike earlier this month in Kunar, which killed nine boys between the ages of 8 and 14, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates personally apologized before Mr. Karzai.

A recent United Nations report said 2,777 Afghan civilians were killed in 2010—about three-fourths of them because of insurgent activity, up 28% from the year before.  

Although coalition-caused civilian casualties have been contained in recent years by tightening the rules of engagement, the majority of such casualties are the result of air strikes, which killed 171 civilians last year, according to the U.N. report. Mr. Karzai has repeatedly asked U.S.-led coalition forces to end air strikes, without success. 

In a separate incident Saturday, a coalition service member died in an insurgent attack in southern Afghanistan, a statement from the coalition said, without specifying where the death occurred or the nationality. 

The death brings to 99 the total number of allied troops killed so far this year, according to icasualties.org, a site that tracks coalition fatalities.

—Habib Khan Totakhil and Dion Nissenbaum contributed to this article.