GRANTHAM, Australia—Crops are once again being harvested in fields around the Australian town of Grantham, but almost all of the town's 150-odd homes are still standing in an area devastated during the worst floods to hit the Pacific nation in almost a generation.

Sprawled across the fertile floodplain of the Lockyer Creek, Grantham's residents are no strangers to volatile weather. But the scale of the disaster that spread across Queensland state from late last year through early this year was unprecedented.

"It was only when I saw houses floating down the creek that I started to think, 'This is pretty serious,'" said John Gallagher, who has lived in a borrowed caravan on his 20-acre site in the town after flash flooding on Jan. 10 destroyed the house where he lived for 25 years.

Australia's government estimates that the four months of disastrous weather across eastern Australia from November to March have cost the country's economy nine billion Australian dollars (US$9.62 billion), shaving half a percentage point off economic growth in the year to the end of June. The country's Treasurer, Wayne Swan, has said the floods will take a "heavy toll" on the country's finances ahead of a budget today expected to deliver one of the country's largest-ever deficits. The cost of the disaster is a key challenge for the government, which made an election pledge in August to return the budget to surplus by 2012. The Reserve Bank of Australia, the country's central bank, has cited the delay in restarting flooded mine operations in its decision to keep interest rates on hold for the past six months. 

The disaster also played out on global markets. Queensland supplies around two-thirds of the world market for premium steelmaking coal and is one of the world's largest exporters of sugar and cotton. Prices for steelmaking coal have risen more than 50% in recent months as flooded sites have hampered production from the region's coal mines, and  QR National Ltd., the world's largest coal hauler, predicts that 25 million tons—one in every eight it would normally carry—will be missed over the year to the end of June. 

Losses to agriculture will total A$1.6 billion, according to IBISWorld, a local market research company, with the cotton industry particularly hard-hit by floodwaters that lingered on some farms for well over a month. Around a quarter of the state's sugar crop has been wiped out, after farms were hit first by flooding and then by Cyclone Yasi, a massive storm that slammed into the north of the state in early February carrying gusts up to 180 miles per hour.

Last month, Australian Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd took diplomats from 64 countries around Queensland in an attempt to show that the economy was roaring back to life, but for many residents of Grantham, normality seems a way off.

Half of the 37 people killed in the summer's storms died in Grantham, a town of 370 people 96 kilometers west of Queensland's state capital, Brisbane. Houses were lifted off their foundations and carried across the paddocks, coming to rest when trees or other obstacles blocked their path. Many are now surrounded by police tape, the words "Unsafe No Entry" sprayed on their walls in orange paint. 

The town's four businesses—a pub, a convenience store, a trucking company and a service station—have been out of action since the waters went through. But there are signs of recovery. A portable building opened at the weekend as the town shop, after its predecessor had its back wall blown out by the floodwaters. 

"A lot of the houses that were sitting in the middle of the road were bulldozed last week, and a lot more are being demolished this week," says Julie Johnson, a local dairy farmer who has been managing the cleanup effort in the town. "We've come a long way."

Twenty-three families have returned to live in their damaged homes, Ms. Johnson says, and driveways are scattered with shipping containers holding owners' possessions. A handful more are living, like Mr. Gallagher, in caravans, sheds or portable buildings on their land.

Locals are unclear about how many will end up leaving the town, although about half of the residents have signed up for a government-sponsored land-swap program to exchange their low-lying properties for sites on the hill to the north of the town.

Funding for the recovery is being helped by Australia's resource boom. The country is one of the few industrialized nations to have avoided a recession in the wake of the global financial crisis, and unemployment is at 4.9% with gross domestic product growth this year expected to come in narrowly below 3%. Australia's government still insists it will be able to return its budget to surplus in 2012, despite this year's deficit.

"Part of the challenge is to convince the international community that this place hasn't been reduced to a pile of rubble by the floods," Mr. Rudd said.

Still, few states in Australia show the full extent of the divergence in its economy between its mining industries and those sectors of the economy hit by the highly valued Australian dollar as starkly as Queensland. 

The mining and energy industry has A$27.84 billion in major capital projects under way in Queensland, and A$132.93 billion in Australia as a whole, putting upward pressure on the cost of all construction work—including rebuilding in the wake of the floods. According to  Justin Paul, of recruitment company Comtec in Brisbane, the annual pay package for civil engineers with three to four years of experience has risen by around 30% in the past year, to A$160,000 from A$120,000 12 months ago. 

In addition, parts of the state's economy are being hit hard by the strength of the Australian dollar, which moved over US$1.10 last week for the first time since it was floated in 1983, a rise of more than a third over the past 12 months. "Tourism is going to continue to suffer a downturn," said Anna Bligh, Queensland's premier. "With such a high Australian dollar people are going to be very cautious about coming somewhere where they might be worried that they might be encountering a damaged and flooded place."

Even the return of the first crops in the Lockyer Valley, one of the country's prime food-growing regions, has brought problems. Linton Brimblecombe, who farms 500 hectares of beetroot, onions, sweet corn, broccoli and grains about 13 kilometers east of Grantham, says that farmers are now confronting an oversupplied market as other domestic horticultural regions have ramped up production since the floods.

"The prices have come right down in the past few weeks. They've been shocking," Mr. Brimblecombe said. "And we've still got blocks of ground that haven't produced anything, and piles of silt waist-deep on the fields."

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The town of Grantham lies 96 kilometers west of Queensland's state capital, Brisbane. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said Grantham was east of Brisbane.

 Write to  David Fickling at david.fickling@dowjones.com 