BEIJING—China said Saturday it had discovered trace levels of radiation in northeastern Heilongjiang province, a day after it announced a ban on imports of some fresh foods from Japan, adding to fears of possible radiation contamination from troubled nuclear reactors.

China's National Nuclear Emergency Coordination Committee said the radiation originated at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported. But the radiation level detected was "below one-hundred-thousandth of the average natural background radiation," and therefore "did not pose a risk to public health or the environment," Xinhua reported. It said no safety measures were needed given the low levels. 

Saturday's announcement came amid stepped-up efforts by China's government to reassure residents about nuclear safety, both from Japan's damaged plants and from China's own power industry.

"There is a guarantee for the safety of China's nuclear power facilities," said Tian Shujia, who oversees nuclear-safety centers under the Ministry of Environmental Protection, in an interview published by the People's Daily, the Communist Party's mouthpiece. He said China wouldn't abandon its nuclear expansion plans "for fear of slight risks."

On Friday, China's quality watchdog announced a ban on fresh-food imports from Japan's affected prefectures.

China's General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine said the ruling bars imports of dairy products, fruit, vegetables, seafood, and other "water products" from five areas near the crippled nuclear plant in Japan's northern Fukushima prefecture. It didn't say how long the ban would last.

The move is part of efforts by Chinese authorities to ward off any effects of the nuclear leaks in neighboring Japan amid jitters about radiation that have persisted despite the Japanese government saying there is no danger. 

China has seen panic-buying and hoarding of salt in cities such as Shanghai—some 1,800 kilometers from Fukushima—because people believed it would protect them from radiation poisoning.

Separately on Friday, the government agency said two Japanese travelers who flew from Tokyo recently had been quarantined in eastern China after authorities detected above-normal radiation levels. The government's statement left details of the case murky, and it was unclear how the travelers could have been contaminated from the Fukushima incident, which Japanese authorities have said affected only people near the damaged nuclear facility.

The inspection and quarantine administration said the two Japanese citizens, whom it didn't identify, didn't pose any risk to others. It said they arrived Wednesday in eastern China's Wuxi City and were found to have radiation levels that "seriously exceeded the limit." But the agency didn't specify any radiation amounts. Radiation levels can be significantly higher than normal without posing serious health risks.

The passengers told quarantine officials one was from Nagano prefecture and the other from Saitama prefecture. Both of those are more than 200 kilometers from the Fukushima plant—far beyond the radius that officials have said could affect residents. 

Officials at the inspection and quarantine administration declined to comment Friday, as did officials at the hospital where Xinhua reported the two passengers were quarantined. Japanese Embassy officials couldn't be reached to comment.

Also Friday, Japanese shipping company Mitsui O.S.K. Lines Ltd. said one of its container ships was requested to stay off the southern Chinese port of Xiamen after Chinese authorities detected abnormal levels of radiation. The vessel was on its way from the U.S. and Japan, and had docked in Tokyo on March 17th, Xinhua reported.

A spokeswoman for the company said the source and levels of radiation weren't immediately available.

—Hiroyuki Kachi in Tokyo contributed to this article.