  Denise Rosner is using her singing talent for good.

The sales proceeds from her recently released album, "For Good," go to Sylvia's Place, an emergency overnight shelter for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth operated by the Metropolitan Community Church of New York. Sylvia's Place provides hot meals, clothing and physical and mental health services daily for about 500 young people a year.

Ms. Rosner, 47 years old, is a senior vice president with Halstead Property and lives in Manhattan. About six years ago, a friend encouraged her to get back in to singing by joining the choir at the Metropolitan Community Church of New York. In the mid-'80s, Ms. Rosner sang what she calls "boom, boom techno-pop '80s dance music" with the girl band Girl Talk. Her repertoire now is something more subdued. 

"I have embraced the easy-listening genre," she jokes.

While the church at first wasn't an obvious fit for Ms. Rosner, "it's a gay church and I'm a straight Jew," she says, she found her spiritual home and has been singing Sundays with the choir since. 

Over the years, she's gotten to know some of the young people who visit the shelter for services.

With the encouragement of the choir and with a good repertoire of solos under her belt, Ms. Rosner decided she could record an album to benefit Sylvia's Place. And so she quickly set out to raise the $15,000 needed to make the album from friends, family, clients and colleagues, throwing in several thousand dollars of her own money to pull it together.

Musicians donated their time to the album. The arranging and producing was handled by the church's music director,  John Fisher. And the recording studio cut their rate for the project. 

"It all came together in a wonderfully serendipitous way to have a direct impact on one of the church programs," says Ms. Rosner.

Two benefit concerts later and with online CD sales at $14 a pop, Ms. Rosner's album has raised nearly $7,000 for Sylvia's Place. She hopes to get it on iTunes soon, too.

The gift has "several layers of meaning for us," says the church's Rev.  Pat Bumgardner. "Denise made the CD as a way to offer ongoing support for the services we provide for homeless youth and that's really priceless to us. The current economic situation has meant that a lot of our sources of funding have dried up. It's really, really important to us."

Rev. Bumgardner goes on, "But I think it has a broader significance for us in that the CD itself, the songs on it, really communicate a message of human connection and love and strength and beauty."