Fashion designer, photographer, magazine editor, entrepreneur—Milan Vukmirovic wears many stylish hats. 

Born in Chantilly, France in 1970 to a Yugoslavian family, he has been the creative director of Italian luxury goods company Gruppo Trussardi since 2008, after working at Gucci with Tom Ford and at Jil Sander. 

Recently, he presented "Unpublished," a photography exhibition at Art Basel in Miami and co-founded that city's (and arguably the country's) hottest new retail spot, The Webster, a three-story boutique for fashion, photography, design and food, housed in an Art Deco space finished with milky marble and brass. 

Mr. Vukmirovic has also been developing the store's website, thewebstermiami.com (launching Feb. 9), which will open the shop's impeccably curated offerings to the world.

Mr. Vukmirovic's fashion career took off in 1997, when he co-founded Colette, the revered Paris fashion boutique of which he was creative director and buyer. Later he became editor-in-chief of the magazines l'Officiel Homme and l'Officiel Homme Italia. 

On the 100th anniversary of Trussardi, we spoke to the ever-polished Mr. Vukmirovic in his Milan office while he sipped cappuccino in a grey sweater and black leather shoes (no socks).

Beside him were piles of old Trussardi catalogues, fashion magazines and sketches he'd been working on throughout the night.

 I never work alone. It's crucial for an artist to surround himself with other creative people. 

 The two people I have learned the most from are Patrizio Bertelli [chief executive of Prada] and Tom Ford. Both of them are dreamers but they are also tenacious and focused and know how to build teams that work well together. Think about Tom Ford choosing Christopher Bailey [creative director of Burberry] and Francisco Costa [creative director of Calvin Klein] to work with him. It's genius. 

 One thing that I really can't resist is Haribo jellies.

 My greatest escape is in Marrakech, at La Mamounia hotel. They renovated it recently and it is just marvelous.

 The shops I like the most are the Webster in Miami, of course, Comme des Garçons in Tokyo and Moss in New York. 

 My favorite restaurant is Zero Contemporary Food, in Milan.

 One bad habit that I have is smoking, but I work too much to find the right time to quit.

 I would like to design a hotel. I know exactly how I would like it to look. Many hotels don't have a soul. I would like mine to have everything I find essential when I am away from home.

 The best present I ever received is my Rolex watch. I got it for my 30th birthday. All my friends and my family members contributed to buying it, therefore it reminds me of each of them. 

 A man must have a military jacket with five pockets in his wardrobe. It doesn't matter if it is vintage or not. 

 I never forget to pack my American Apparel V-neck T-shirts. 

 I can't live without freedom and music.

—Edited from an interview by Nathania Zevi