A U.S. marshal who was shot in the head during a gunfight with a violent fugitive in St. Louis died late Tuesday evening. The shootout, which left the suspect dead and two other officers injured, is one of several bloody confrontations recently that have highlighted the risks federal agents face in hunting fugitives.

The gunfight, at a house on the city's south side, erupted after marshals and police officers tried to arrest a 35-year-old fugitive identified as Carlos Boles. After several children left the building, deputy marshals and police approached to make the arrest. Almost immediately, Mr. Boles responded by opening fire, according to police. 

 A St. Louis police officer was grazed in the face by a bullet, and one of the marshals was shot in the ankle, police said. Both are expected to recover.

An agency spokesman said the other marshal, who was shot in the head, died Tuesday evening of his injuries. He was identified as 48-year-old John Perry.

Mr. Boles was later found dead of a gunshot wound in the house, and police said they believed he died from return fire by the officers seeking to take him into custody. Authorities were trying to arrest Mr. Boles for having allegedly assaulted a police officer.

St. Louis Mayor Francis Slay called Tuesday's shooting "a tragic example of what our law-enforcement officers go through every day.''

Outside the scene of the shooting, a woman named Sannita Vaughan said she was Mr. Boles's sister. "All we know is, they killed him," Ms. Vaughn told reporters.

Even before they approached the house, authorities knew taking Mr. Boles into custody wouldn't be easy. In the course of tracking him down, investigators found the suspect had made statements that they would need a "body bag'' to bring him in, according to a person familiar with the case.

Court records indicate Mr. Boles had been arrested last October on charges of attempted assault, marijuana possession and resisting arrest. He also had previously pleaded guilty to assault in a 1992 case, and been sentenced to 10 years in prison.

Apprehending fugitives has always been dangerous work, but federal marshals have been killed or injured in such confrontations in each of the past three months.

In February, deputy U.S. marshal Derek Hotsinpiller was shot and killed trying to execute an arrest warrant for a drug suspect in Elkins, W.Va. Two other deputies were wounded. A month earlier, another deputy marshal was shot and two police officers were killed in a shootout in St. Petersburg, Fla., with a fugitive.

Before the death of Mr. Hotsinpiller, the last deputy to die in the line of duty from gunfire was 19 years ago, at a confrontation that took place in Ruby Ridge, Idaho.

Jon Adler, president of the Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association, whose membership includes deputy U.S. marshals, said he believed that the recent bloodshed in fugitive apprehensions was a symptom of "a new culture among some violent criminals who are entirely irrational and who seem to have some notion they would rather go out in a blaze of glory.''

Mr. Adler said U.S. marshals were well trained, but would be less exposed to a sudden burst of gunfire at a fugitive's doorway if they had thermal imaging equipment to help them see beforehand where people are inside the building.

U.S. marshals have the job of protecting federal courthouses and judges, as well as tracking down and apprehending fugitives. In 2009, U.S. marshals apprehended 36,000 federal fugitives, as well as 90,000 state and local fugitives through joint task forces.

 Write to  Devlin Barrett at devlin.barrett@wsj.com 