SYDNEY—Australian retail sales were much weaker than expected in the first quarter, sending the Australian dollar to its lowest level in over a week and fueling concerns the economy contracted sharply.

Economists said devastating floods in Queensland in January and a massive storm in February hit consumer demand, with higher oil prices and earthquakes in New Zealand and Japan likely further denting consumers' mood.



The data may delay the expected interest-rate increase by the Reserve Bank of Australia, despite greater-than-expected first-quarter inflation, economists said.

March retail sales came to a seasonally adjusted $20.46 billion Australian dollars, down 0.5% from A$20.55 billion the month before, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said Thursday. Economists had expected a 0.5% rise. Sales were up 2.3% from the year-earlier A$20.00 billion.

For the first quarter, sales were steady in chain volume terms, compared with expectations of a 0.7% rise.

The Australian dollar fell to US$1.0703 from around US$1.0763 immediately after the report; it was recently at US$1.0711. 

Shares in major retailers were immediately hit by the data, falling between 1% and 2%.

In addition to taking many lives, the floods at the start of the year interrupted coal exports from Queensland, destroyed crops and sent a deluge into the main business district of Brisbane.

The RBA has said it will look through "noise" coming from the floods and stay focused on longer-term trends, but economists said that this retail sales result will surprise the central bank.

"If you thought the first quarter was pretty bad, it's going to be worse," said  Stephen Walters, chief economist at JPMorgan, Australia. "This may take some of the urgency out of the talk this week about them (RBA) hiking next month."

Offsetting some of the gloom, building approvals rose 9.1% in March, the ABS said.

  Michael Turner, an economist at RBC Capital, said the impact of Japan's earthquake, tsunami and nuclear emergency likely also damped consumer confidence, which was reflected in retail sales.

—Enda Curran and Geoffrey Rogow contributed to this article. 

 Write to  James Glynn at james.glynn@dowjones.com 