The conservative activist whose video-sting operation led to the ouster this week of two top National Public Radio executives released more information Thursday that he said showed NPR was more willing to accept money from a bogus Islamic group than it had claimed.

Activist James O'Keefe issued an audio recording of a conversation between NPR executive Betsy Liley and a member of the fictitious Muslim Education Action Center about how to proceed with a $5 million donation, including her suggestion the gift wouldn't be subject to an audit. 

Mr. O'Keefe also released an email from Ms. Liley, dated March 1. In it, she wrote that she was "awaiting a draft of a gift agreement from our legal counsel and will share it when I have it." 

NPR disputed the notion that the new information showed it more willing to take money from the group than it had indicated, noting a gift agreement never got beyond the internal drafting stage and was never sent.

The network said Ms. Liley's suggestion "in the audio tapes released today regarding the possibility of making an anonymous gift that would remain invisible to tax authorities is factually inaccurate and not reflective of NPR's gift practices."

 Mr. O'Keefe's sting has emboldened NPR's critics on the right who have long claimed the network had a liberal bias, and who want to cut the news organization's federal funding. NPR's defenders say the radio network is a valuable source of noncommercial news and information.

Ms. Liley, the network's senior director of institutional giving, was one of two NPR executives who lunched Feb. 22 with representatives of the fake organization, which Mr. O'Keefe fabricated. The other executive, Ron Schiller, resigned as NPR's fund-raising chief Tuesday after Mr. O'Keefe made public a video of the lunch capturing Mr. Schiller making disparaging remarks about Republicans and tea-party supporters. At that time, NPR announced also that Ms. Liley was placed on administrative leave. 

On Wednesday, NPR Chief Executive Vivian Schiller—no relation to Mr. Schiller—also announced her resignation.

After the video was posted Tuesday, NPR issued a statement that the ostensible donors "repeatedly pressed us to accept a $5 million check, with no strings attached, which we repeatedly refused to accept."

Mr. O'Keefe said Thursday that the audio tapes show NPR hadn't been forthcoming about its communication with the fictitious group. "It shows them certainly entertaining the donation," and willing to work with people who just expressed anti-Semitic and disgusting views Mr. O'Keefe said. 

In the roughly 40 minutes of recorded conversation between Ms. Liley and the man who called himself Ibrahim Kasaam, much of the focus is on whether the group could remain anonymous and whether it would be shielded from a government audit. Ms. Liley told the man that anonymous gifts were relatively common and that only a few people at NPR would know the identity of the donors. 

Asked if the group would be shielded from an audit, Ms. Liley responded, "I think that is the case, especially if you are anonymous, and I can inquire about that." In a March 1 email to Mr. Kasaam, she wrote, "NPR can list MEAC as an anonymous donor in our database, which would mean we would not disclose the organization's name. We do not publish a list of gifts, so it would not be an issue there."

At one point, Ms. Liley said NPR would like to have the organization's federal form 990, which are required by the Internal Revenue Service of nonprofit groups. Mr. Kasaam asked why, and Ms. Liley explained that it is standard practice. Later, she told Mr. Kasaam that what NPR's general counsel, Joyce Slocum, was putting together "was the simplest of things that we use, which would be a letter" of agreement. 

The note continued, "The audits of our governmental grants are conducted by the same audit firm we hire to do our NPR financial audit." Ms. Liley added that she would send a draft of a gift agreement from NPR's legal counsel. 

NPR also released email between the network and the group that it said demonstrated repeated refusals of the gift. In one dated March 3, Ms. Schiller recounted to colleagues a conversation in which she told a group member NPR needed to "sort out" issues regarding his group's tax status before it could move forward. 

In one the following day, NPR General Counsel Joyce Slocum told a group member her organization was unable to find documentation verifying his group was in compliance with Internal Revenue Service rules for charitable organizations. 

Mr. O'Keefe added there were more communications with NPR that he planned to release soon, depending on the network's response to the latest materials. "What they have omitted is the steps they took to work with us," Mr. O'Keefe said. 

Mr. O'Keefe has sparked controversy in the past. In 2009, he dressed as a pimp and secretly recorded meetings in regional offices of the group Acorn. 

In January 2010, he was arrested with three other men who posed as repairmen in an alleged attempt to tamper with phones in the New Orleans offices of Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu. 

The men pleaded guilty to reduced charges and were fined and sentenced to probation and community service.

On Wednesday after NPR announced the resignation of Ms. Schiller, NPR Chairman Dave Edwards said the incident illustrated the effectiveness of the radio network's procedures for vetting potential donors. "That process worked," Mr. Edwards said. 

Asked whether NPR executives who attended the Feb. 22 lunch could have done adequate due diligence considering the meeting was with a made-up organization, Mr. Edwards defended the executives' actions outside of what was said at the lunch. 

He said it would be "appropriate" for an NPR executive to have a conversation with a potential donor and that "clearly, NPR never accepted a check from this organization." 

"In fact, following that luncheon, that's when a lot of the checking began," Mr. Edwards said. "NPR did not set up a time to receive a check because it was going through the processes it should have gone through." 

 Write to  Russell Adams at russell.adams@wsj.com 