FRANKFURT—ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet used his first major address of the new year to appeal to governments to "turn the page" from a crisis-marred 2010 and redouble their efforts to rein in budgets and apply harsh penalties to deficit rule-breakers.

Mr. Trichet assured German lawmakers at a party conference in southern Germany that he wouldn't stray from the ECB's anti-inflation mandate even as higher food and energy prices have pushed euro-zone inflation to a two-year high, and again defended last year's controversial decision to purchase government bonds of vulnerable euro members.

"After one of the most difficult years for our still young common currency, it is time to turn the page," Mr. Trichet told members of Germany's conservative Christian Social Union, or CSU, the Bavarian wing of the ruling Christian Democrats.

"Monetary-policy responsibility cannot substitute for government irresponsibility," Mr. Trichet said.

Investors remain skeptical that Europe's leaders will be able to quickly solve a fiscal crisis that has already pushed Greece and Ireland into bailouts and now threatens Portugal and Spain. A reminder of those doubts came Friday as the euro dipped to a four-month low against the U.S. dollar, falling below $1.30. Portuguese borrowing costs rose, with yields on the country's 10-year bonds climbing above 7% ahead of a planned debt sale next week.

Euro-zone data released Friday showed that growth was slightly weaker than had been previously estimated in the third quarter of last year and unemployment remains at its highest rate for more than 12 years.

Additionally, lower-than-expected data for retail sales, industrial output and the trade surplus in Germany—which has driven the currency area's recovery from recession—also disappointed economists Friday, although most remain confident the country's economy will power ahead this year.

Mr. Trichet spent much of 2010 justifying his debt-crisis response to a skeptical German public that is wary of the inflationary effects of overly stimulative monetary policy and government bond purchases, both of which run counter to the conservative philosophy of the ECB's predecessor in Germany, the Bundesbank. Relations between the Frankfurt-based ECB and its host country were severely strained after officials decided, in May, to buy government bonds of high-deficit countries such as Greece, Portugal and Ireland. That pitted Mr. Trichet against the powerful head of the Bundesbank, Axel Weber, who publicly denounced the decision as a threat to stability.

Mr. Trichet is still defending the move eight months later, saying Friday that buying bonds doesn't interfere with the ECB's anti-inflation mandate. "The reason for the [bond-buying] decision was certainly not to finance debt-laden member states, but to address some severe malfunctioning of markets," he said.

The ECB has bought €74 billion ($95 billion) worth of Irish, Greek and Portuguese bonds to date. Though purchases slowed markedly at the end of last month, Mr. Trichet said Friday that the program is continuing. Many economists think Mr. Trichet will again need to buy large amounts of bonds in coming weeks amid mounting concerns that high borrowing costs will push Portugal into a rescue package from the EU and International Monetary Fund. Greece and Ireland were forced to accept bailouts last year.

Mr. Trichet assured his German audience that he is "solemnly" committed to keeping inflation low, reminding them, as he did often in 2010, that inflation in Europe's largest country has been much lower since the creation of the euro a dozen years ago than it was in the decades before. "So the ECB has performed its duty," Mr. Trichet said.

Yet signs are emerging that record-low interest rates, which Mr. Trichet is expected to maintain when the ECB meets Thursday, and generous liquidity being provided to commercial banks are starting to give rise to higher prices in Germany and across the 17-member currency bloc. At 2.2%, annual euro zone inflation is above the ECB's sub-2% target for the first time in more than two years, and German inflation has accelerated in recent months amid a robust economic recovery and falling unemployment.

"This might become the number one topic of the year," says ING Bank economist  Carsten Brzeski. If inflation keeps rising, "it will be harder [for the ECB] to maintain the current crisis management" policies, he says.

Despite his appeal to "turn the page," Mr. Trichet continued to dwell on perhaps his biggest policy-related defeat of 2010: the rejection by governments of his demand for strict, automatic sanctions on countries that exceed Europe's budget deficit limits. Under a French-German accord reached in October and backed by other governments, the ultimate decision on sanctions will be left in the hands of political leaders and not be applied automatically.

"The proposals that we have seen in Brussels do not go far enough in the ECB's view," Mr. Trichet said.

Mr. Trichet appeared to hold out hope that he can still sway the debate, saying there is an "open and frank exchange of views" on the subject.

"We should be inflexible in applying sanctions if rules are breached," Mr. Trichet said, and penalties should include "fines, reduced access to EU funds, and other pecuniary consequences."

"It's interesting that he still comes back to the ECB's view on the Stability and Growth Pact," says Mr. Brzeski. "He hasn't taken his loss completely." 

 Write to  Brian Blackstone at brian.blackstone@dowjones.com 