Iran has invited representatives of several nations to visit its nuclear installations this month, including Russia, China and the European Union, but has excluded the U.S. from the proposed trip, according to diplomats briefed on Tehran's correspondence. 

The Obama administration and a number of European and Arab governments quickly dismissed Tehran's overture, saying they viewed it as an attempt by Iran to reduce mounting economic pressure aimed at curbing its nuclear program.

"A tour for some countries is not a substitute for sustained and transparent cooperation," State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said Monday. "Iran continues to be in violation of its international obligations and the international community won't be distracted by this ploy."

Two diplomats from EU countries said Monday their governments were unlikely to accept Tehran's invitation specifically because it is seen as an attempt to divide the international community. Rather, they said Tehran should be prepared to engage in serious discussions with the West and allow greater access to international inspectors from the U.N.'s nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency.

"Let's make sure nobody gives a hand to this…attempt at disguising opacity as transparency," said one of the European diplomats working on Iran.

The invitation for a visit to Iran by "high-ranking officials" on the weekend of Jan. 16-17 comes as the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council—China, France, Russia, the U.K. and the U.S.—with Germany, prepare to hold a second round of talks with Iran aimed at curbing its nuclear work. The meeting is tentatively scheduled for late January in Istanbul.

An earlier round of talks in Geneva last month resulted in no signs that Iran may be willing to comply with Security Council resolutions and suspend its production of nuclear fuel. 

U.S. and European officials have voiced concerns that Iran may seek to use the diplomacy to stave off more economic sanctions while Tehran continues to push forward with producing nuclear fuel at its Natanz uranium-enrichment facility in central Iran. 

Iranian officials claimed Monday that the invitation was a sign of the "peaceful nature" of its nuclear work, as well as Tehran's willingness to work with the international community. "Iran always has shown maximum transparency in its nuclear activities," said an Iranian diplomat.

Some member states of the Arab League, including Egypt, also were invited, according to the Associated Press. 

The AP reported that Iran invited the diplomats to visit the Natanz facility, as well as Tehran's light-water reactor in Bushehr on the Persian Gulf. The visiting diplomats would also have meetings with Iran's foreign minister, Ali Akbar Salehi, and Tehran's chief nuclear negotiator, Saeed Jalili.

Western diplomats noted on Monday that inspectors from the IAEA already have regular access to Natanz, as well as to Iran's nuclear fuel-conversion center at Isfahan. 

Western diplomats also discounted Iran's offer for observers to visit Bushehr. The reactor is being built by Russia and the spent nuclear fuel will be shipped out of Iran for storage. The IAEA, subsequently, has only limited concerns that Bushehr's fissile materials could be used for military purposes. 

U.S. officials said Monday that Iran, instead of inviting foreign diplomats, should grant the IAEA greater access to its nuclear installations. They note that the agency isn't allowed to visit Iran's heavy water reactor in Arak, or some of its uranium ore mines. 

In late 2009, the U.S. also exposed a clandestine uranium-enrichment facility that Tehran was building near the holy city of Qom. The IAEA remains concerned that the facility may have been designed to produce weapons-grade uranium.

Some Arab governments on Monday also expressed skepticism toward Iran's invitation. "This sounds like their usual strategy," said a senior Arab diplomat. "Leading you on with false promise, designed to buy more time."

The Obama administration has moved to increase financial pressure on Iran heading into the talks in Turkey later this month. In late December, the U.S. Treasury Department announced new financial penalties against Iran's elite military unit, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, as well as the country's largest shipping company.

Last week, India joined international efforts to pressure Iran by announcing it was terminating oil purchases through an Asian financial clearinghouse that Washington suspects had been utilized by Tehran to evade sanctions. New Delhi is a key financial and diplomatic partner of Tehran.