When Jim Ferry accepted the job as men's basketball coach at Long Island University in the spring of 2002, he inherited an abysmal record and a depleted roster. That came as no surprise to the man who had just completed a wildly successful tenure at Division II Adelphi in the Long Island suburbs. What truly shocked him was the physical condition of the program.

"We had two baskets on the whole campus when I got here," Ferry noted. Both were located in what had been the orchestra of the former Brooklyn Paramount Theatre, which served as the most iconic and bizarre home court of any Division I school in the country. Once national champions and the holders of the record for consecutive victories under Hall of Fame coach Clair Bee in the 1930s, the Blackbirds had evolved into a basketball sideshow by the start of the 21st century.

Unbeknownst to the new coach, athletic director John Suarez and provost Gale Stevens Haynes had been hatching a plan for a new sports complex. "I didn't want to promise him anything and then not deliver," Suarez recalled the other day as LIU prepared for its first NCAA tournament game in 14 years. "And I wanted to see what he'd do without it."

 What Ferry did in the old facility was enough to convince Suarez he had the right man for the job. What the coach has accomplished since the dedication of the Wellness, Recreation and Athletic Center in 2006 will be on display Friday night against five-time champion North Carolina. The Blackbirds (27-5) won the Northeast Conference regular-season and tournament titles, established the longest current winning streak in the country (13 games) and restored the program to a level unattained since the 1951 point-shaving scandals.

"For me, it was never about the gym or my office," said Ferry, the son of a retired transit cop from East New York. "It was about [the support of] the administration. I'm a New York guy. I wanted to bring back the tradition at LIU. But these players weren't coming here if we still played in the old Paramount."

Of the eight players who comprise the Blackbirds' regular rotation, three hail from Texas, two from Maryland and one apiece from Canada, Minnesota and Massachusetts. The only New Yorker on the roster is sophomore reserve Booker Hucks from Bay Shore. 

It was a matter of necessity that drove Ferry so far out of town. LIU had lost its first 16 games en route to a 5-22 record the season before the coach was hired. "We were the lowest team on the [New York] totem pole," the coach said. "The better kids in New York didn't want to come here. So we went to Texas, to Canada, to the Eastern prep schools. We wanted people who wanted to come here."

The players came for different reasons but all felt a connection with the coach and believed in his vision. While the urban surroundings might have scared off some, they attracted others. "It's great to live in New York City for free," declared Julian Boyd, the powerful sophomore forward from San Antonio and the emotional leader of the team.

Truth is, Ferry and Suarez both anticipated the team's arrival on the national stage a year ago. After being selected conference rookie of the year as a freshman, the 6-7 Boyd appeared ready to join star guard Jaytornah Wisseh, a Brooklyn native of all things, as the catalysts of a championship contender in 2009-10. A pickup game back home in Texas rearranged that plan. Boyd wound up at the hospital with what doctors eventually diagnosed as noncompaction cardiomyopathy, a heart condition that jeopardized the player's career.

He sat out the entire season while his team struggled to a 14-17 mark and a third-place finish (11-7) in the NEC. After what seemed to be an endless battery of tests, Boyd finally received medical clearance to resume playing basketball in July 2010. Wisseh had graduated, but in his place, Ferry added two point guards with remarkable speed in transfer C.J. Garner, a former high school teammate of forward Jamal Olasewere in Maryland, and freshman Jason Brickman from Boyd's hometown.

What Boyd brought to the Blackbirds this season was not just his old-school post moves and dependable rebounding but a determination to make something of every play. "When Julian got back," senior guard David Hicks reflected, "his passion oozed out of his body."

"I told coach,'' Boyd recalled, "'I don't want to play timid. I want to play every game like it's my last…because it might be.'"

The Blackbirds clicked almost immediately. They won their first four games, lost four of six (only one by more than six points) and then swept 21 of their last 22, including all three in the NEC tournament. They used the same starting lineup in all but three games and no one averaged more than 27 minutes or 10 field goal attempts. Seven different players led LIU in scoring and 11 scored at least 10 points on one occasion. 

So when Boyd got in early foul trouble and was largely ineffective in the team's most important game, the tournament finale against two-time defending champion Robert Morris, Olasewere responded with a career-best 31-point effort. "That's the beauty of this team," Olasewere said.

This team may have a lasting impact on the institution and the community. In the wake of the Blackbirds' success—and six of the top eight players have at least one year of eligibility remaining—LIU has been negotiating with officials of the Barclays Center rising a few blocks east at Atlantic Terminal. "Hopefully," Suarez said, "we'll be able to arrange a Christmas tournament, get a couple of big schools to come. We're talking with St. Francis about bringing first and second-round games of the NCAA tournament to Brooklyn. Now that we're over the hump, it's going to be an exciting time."