MUMBAI—Indian billionaire  Anil Ambani and four of his group company's directors agreed not to invest in the country's stock markets until December as part of an agreement with regulators to settle allegations of misusing funds raised abroad.

Two of his group's firms—Reliance Infrastructure Ltd. and Reliance Natural Resources Ltd.—shall also stay away from investing in the secondary markets for an additional year, until December 2012, under the agreement.

The case involves allegations by the Securities & Exchange Board of India that the two Ambani-headed Reliance Group companies named had used loans raised abroad to invest in the stock market through overseas companies. Reliance Natural Resources later merged with Reliance Power Ltd., another group company. 

A SEBI order posted on its website said the companies and the five people proposed the settlement with the regulator in September 2010. 

The regulator, however, allowed the companies and the five individuals to participate in primary issues, buybacks and open offers during the period mentioned. 

In a statement, Reliance Infrastructure said Mr. Ambani and the four others— Satish Seth, S.C. Gupta, Lalit Jalan and  J.P. Chalsani—"voluntarily" paid a settlement fees of 250 million rupees ($5.5 million) "with no burden" on the company. 

The settlement isn't an admission or denial of guilt, but was being made in the interests of investors to pre-empt "unnecessary and time-consuming litigation," the company said. 

A company spokesperson said that the two group companies and five individuals volunteered not to invest in the secondary markets, which was agreed to by the regulator as part of the settlement. 

Meanwhile, the SEBI said its investigations revealed that both Reliance Infrastructure and Reliance Natural Resources were responsible for misrepresenting the nature of investments in their annual reports for the fiscal years through March 2007, 2008 and 2009.

The regulator said it accepted the settlement on the condition that the two companies will rotate their auditors, with a gap of three years between two audits by a single auditor. Post the settlement, it has disposed off the proceedings against the companies and the individuals. 

Reliance Infrastructure said the settlement maintains full financial flexibility of the company to implement its projects. 

Shares of Reliance Infrastructure closed 1.4% down at 798.25 rupees, while those of Reliance Power ended 1.1% down at 146.90 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange, compared with a 1.7% fall for the benchmark Sensitive Index. 

 Write to  John Satish Kumar at john.kumar@dowjones.com 