The fraying marriage between  Yahoo Inc.
YHOO


-0.65
%




 and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. reached a low point Friday as the two sparred over the way the Chinese company transferred a key business to its chief executive. 

Yahoo claimed it was blind-sided by the transaction, fueling questions about whether the Internet giant has lost control over its most valuable investment. It also turns a spotlight on the increasingly difficult challenges facing Western companies trying to do business in China. 

Already, Yahoo, whose 40% stake in closely held Alibaba Group is valued at as much as $10 billion, has lost $2.7 billion in market value since the dispute became public Tuesday. 

The disagreement centers on the transfer of one of Alibaba Group's key properties, a PayPal like online-payments unit called Alipay, to an outside company controlled by Alibaba Group's founder and chief executive,  Jack Ma. 

The companies on Sunday issued a joint statement saying that they are "committed to productive negotiations to resolve the outstanding issues" on Alipay. They declined further comment.

Yahoo, which holds one of Alibaba Group's four board seats, had said it didn't learn about the transfer until March 31, seven months after it had occurred. 

Alibaba Group fired back Friday, saying directors "discussed at numerous board meetings over the past three years" that China's government was planning new requirements that could require a change in Alipay's ownership. Alibaba Group said its board was told in July 2009 that "majority shareholding in Alipay had been transferred to Chinese ownership" in order to comply with new Chinese central bank rules requiring local ownership. 

On Friday, Yahoo stood by its account that it and Softbank Corp., Alibaba Group's No. 2 shareholder, with 33%, weren't notified of the transfer until March 31. Nevertheless, Yahoo said it "is in active and constructive negotiations with Softbank and Alibaba Group to preserve the integrity of this investment and maximize shareholder value."



A spokeswoman for Softbank, which also sits on Alibaba Group's board, on Friday declined to comment. Softbank said Thursday it too was engaged in discussions with Alibaba Group and Yahoo on the terms of the restructuring, but hasn't commented on when it learned about the transfer.

All three companies agree the Alipay transfer was done to expedite the company's application for a necessary regulatory license. The disagreement centers on whether the transfer was done with the permission of the board and the appropriate compensation.

Alibaba Group said it was compensated for the asset transfer, but declined to provide details. It's not clear how or whether revenue from Alipay will now be distributed to its former parent company, Alibaba Group. 

Yahoo's allegation that Alibaba Group management kept its biggest shareholder in the dark about a major restructuring comes just three months after a fraud scandal at the Chinese company's Hong Kong-listed unit,  Alibaba.com Ltd., that led to the resignation of top Alibaba.com executives in February.

The clash over the handling of the Alipay affair is the latest challenge for Yahoo Chief Executive  Carol Bartz, who has struggled to turn around the Internet giant since taking command in early 2009. Even before this dispute, Yahoo directors were growing impatient, according to one person familiar with the situation. Board members want "to start seeing the results'' this year, this person said. 

However, the Yahoo board doesn't blame Ms. Bartz for escalating tensions with Alibaba Group because she wasn't aware of the Alipay restructuring until recently, according to this person. Directors aren't pointing fingers at her, the person said. Yahoo is "having a battle with the Chinese.'' 

Yahoo and Alibaba have feuded openly in recent years over issues ranging from censorship to Alibaba's desire to buy back Yahoo's stake. Some investors have criticized Ms. Bartz for sticking with the investment and a minority stake in Yahoo Japan, in which Yahoo also has no management role. Ms. Bartz has said she's in no rush to exit the businesses.

Yahoo has had the opportunity to become more involved in Alibaba Group's board, but it hasn't chosen to name a second director. Ms. Bartz last fall said she would "probably" take the seat, but hasn't. Yahoo's representative on the Alibaba Group board is co-founder  Jerry Yang, who no longer has a formal executive role at Yahoo but remains a director. 

In recent months Mr. Yang has become more involved in trying to manage the relationship between Yahoo, Alibaba and Softbank, said another person familiar with the matter. But while there has been more "civil dialogue" behind the scenes, this person said, it hasn't resulted in any breakthroughs.

Yahoo declined to make Mr. Yang or Ms. Bartz available.

Yahoo first disclosed the Alipay restructuring in two sentences in its nearly 50-page quarterly report issued Tuesday. That filing said Yahoo and Softbank were still negotiating with Alibaba Group the terms of the restructuring and the "appropriate commercial arrangements." 

The news sent Yahoo's share price tumbling Wednesday, as investors worried the move would reduce the value of Yahoo's stake in Alibaba Group. It has also raised the possibility Alibaba could make similar moves with other properties it controls.

"I'm really disappointed in Yahoo's board," said  Eric Jackson, founder of Ironfire Capital, a China technology-focused hedge fund and a Yahoo shareholder. "It doesn't make Yahoo's board look like they were on top of things." 

Yahoo said late Thursday the transaction "occurred without the knowledge or approval of the Alibaba Group board of directors or shareholders." That prompted another selloff in Yahoo shares Friday, which fell 3.6% to $16.55 at 4 p.m. on Nasdaq, leaving it down 11% since Tuesday.

The dispute "is a reflection of the challenges that foreign investors face as stakeholders in Chinese enterprises, where company assets and opportunities are at risk when operating in an environment that is opaque and with weak legal safeguards," said  James Zimmerman, a Beijing-based lawyer with Squire Sanders & Dempsey and former chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China. 

Alibaba Group said the restructuring of Alipay was "in the best interests of the company and its shareholders," and that Alipay's continued operation "is essential" to the value of Alibaba Group's businesses, including Taobao, its popular online retail site, for which Alipay handles many of the payments. 

According to Yahoo's original agreement with Alibaba Group, inked in 2005, any single transaction involving the transfer of assets, including subsidiaries, of Alibaba Group worth more than $10 million must be approved by the company's board or shareholders.

Alibaba Group doesn't disclose financial data for Alipay, but some analysts peg the value of the payments business at more than $4 billion. CLSA analyst James Lee has valued Yahoo's interest in Alipay at about $1 billion.

The Alipay affair also has fueled some criticism of Mr. Ma, who founded Alibaba Group and owns 7.5%. A former English teacher whose rags-to-riches tale is the subject of many business books in China, Mr. Ma is known for championing corporate values and for his frequent addresses to employees about valuing principles over profits.

—Joann S. Lublin,  Steven Russolillo and Helen Qu  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Loretta Chao at loretta.chao@wsj.com and Amir Efrati at amir.efrati@wsj.com 