LONDON—Another top London academic institution, University College London, has admitted connections to Libya, joining a growing list of British universities with links to the country under Col. Moammar Gadhafi. 

 Since 2007, the UCL Division of Medical Education has provided teacher training to medical educators in Libya. Senior UCL lecturers have visited Libya eight times since then and received expenses plus a £200-a-day payment totaling around £10,000, or about $16,000, in the four years, a spokeswoman said. 

Last week, a UCL spokeswoman said that the university has no "interactions or donations" from Libya, though she offered the caveat that the university couldn't be absolute about whether anyone had engagement with Libya.

This week, however, the spokeswoman confirmed the training arrangement, saying it was "philanthropic" with negligible financial remuneration and not "an institutionally significant commitment." Jane Richardson, a senior lecturer in Medical Education who took part in the Libyan visits said that she "went in the interests of providing medical education training."

Nagi Barakat, an Honorary Teaching Fellow in the Department of Medicine at another London-based university, Imperial College London, undertook similar work, running ten two-day courses to train medical educators in Libya. Imperial had no "institutional engagement" with this work, which was with the aim "to help improve health-care provision for the general Libyan population," a spokesman for Imperial said. 

But U.K. universities and academics have been criticized by some British lawmakers for helping legitimize a regime with a consistently poor record on human rights through their contacts. 

"The more links you have, the more legitimacy you give to a government," said Robert Halfron, a lawmaker with the ruling Conservative Party. "Would universities and academics have worked in apartheid South Africa's health service?" he said. 

Last week Howard Davies, the president of the London School of Economics, resigned after being criticized for accepting a grant of £1.5 million in 2009 from the Gaddafi International Charity and Development Foundation and for offering economic advice to bodies connected with Col. Gadhafi's regime. 

Earlier this week, the Guardian newspaper highlighted connections between two other top London-based universities and Col. Gadhafi's regime. 

Since 2004, a unit of King's College London has worked on a £680,000 British government financed project to help Libya reform its prisons but was not given access to all the country's jails. A spokesman for the International Centre for Prison Studies said that the project had helped improve conditions in Libyan prisons. 

The School of Oriental and African Studies said it had tutored Col. Gadhafi's son Mutassim Gadhafi in English for four weeks in 2006 and linked up with a Libyan university. 

"At the time, there was no reason why the School would have exceptionally declined to teach him," said a spokeswoman.

Universities have complained that they are being judged retrospectively for decisions made with the best available knowledge and often for individual academic's projects. But critics say that Col. Gadhafi's regime had already given ample proof of its abuse of human rights. 

Universities are not the only institutions to have taken cash from the Gadhafi regime. Last week Demos, a New York-based public-policy think tank, told The Wall Street Journal it had received a $20,000 donation in 2009 from the same foundation that gave money to the LSE.