'Americans like a winner. If you lose, you're nothing." Those words of wisdom came from chess master Bobby Fischer not long before his great triumph over Russian champion Boris Spassky. It's a sentiment that appears to animate our manic philosopher of the moment, Charlie Sheen.

In his wild-eyed, stream-of-strange-consciousness monologues, the actor's most prominent riffs have been on his status as a "winner" (duh). He's even signed a deal for official Sheen-sanctioned "Winning!" merchandise. 

No doubt Mr. Sheen is right that once a celebrity gets into trouble, winning something, anything—whether an award, a lawsuit or even just a game—is a reliable route to public rehabilitation. Tiger Woods remains in the wilderness not because of his epic, priapic misadventures, but because he can't seem to get the old niblick working.

But while it's true that Americans like a winner, with the erratic actor as the new poster boy for the concept, winning may be losing its sheen.

In his memoir of playing basketball for the Citadel, "My Losing Season," novelist Pat Conroy makes a compelling case for the soul-enriching advantages of losing: "Winning is wonderful in every aspect, but the darker music of loss resonates on deeper, richer planes." Winning, Mr. Conroy argues, "shapes the soul of bad movies and novels and lives. It is the subject of thousands of insufferably bad books and is often a sworn enemy of art."

To see what he means, consider the case of Frank Sinatra, a man who was devoted to winning, but whose best music came from an intimate understanding—courtesy of Ava Gardner kicking him to the curb—of what it was to be a loser. Take two iconic Sinatra-sung songs—"One for My Baby (and One More for the Road)" and "My Way"—one a loser's lament, the other a winner's yawping exaltation. Which is a moving meditation on the human predicament, and which is a thuggish anthem? (It's no accident that when Sid Vicious covered Mr. Sinatra, "My Way" was his tune of choice.)

Mr. Conroy is also right that too much experience with winning tends to make us stupid (or at least lures us into a dangerous complacency). "Winning makes you think you'll always get the girl, land the job, deposit the million-dollar check, win the promotion, and you grow accustomed to a life of answered prayers." Which, if you change "the girl" to "the goddesses," seems to describe Mr. Sheen's delusions rather nicely.

The skewed perspective that comes from too much winning can have consequences that, unlike the Sheen spectacle, actually matter. In "The Best and the Brightest," David Halberstam described the charmed life of presidential adviser McGeorge Bundy: He was "like a girl who is both prettier than the other bright girls and brighter than the other pretty girls." With his rocket-boosted rise, Mr. Bundy "picked up less wisdom, less scar tissue than other men." Mr. Halberstam suggested, not unpersuasively, that a lifetime of winning made Mr. Bundy think Vietnam couldn't but go his way.

And then there's Julie Taymor, whose tremendous Broadway success with "The Lion King"—winning!—made it possible for her to get the backing for the most expensive musical ever staged, "Spiderman: Turn Off the Dark." But her winning-won confidence also seems to explain her stubborn resistance to making changes in the problem-plagued show, whose official opening has been postponed countless times. Finally she was shoved to the sidelines. Here's hoping that losing her job this week will be better for Ms. Taymor, artistically, than winning Tonys ever was.

But what can we expect for Mr. Sheen and his peculiarly winning ways? It's worth remembering that Mr. Fischer, the chess star who so famously declared "Americans love a winner," ended up a loathsome caricature of himself, a fugitive without a country. He was a celebrity ruined, as The Atlantic put it, by his own "paranoia, hubris and hatred." Sound familiar?

—Write me at EricFelten@wsjpostmodern.com 