 Toyota said it will recall more than 1.7 million vehicles world-wide because of faulty parts including defective fuel devices, giving the company's once-prestigious reputation for quality another black eye.  

 Hong Kong broadcaster TVB said its biggest shareholder, Shaw Brothers, agreed to sell its 26% stake to a group of three investors led by ITC Corp. Chairman Charles Chan. TVB said 103-year-old Run Run Shaw will remain as chairman after the share sale.  

 The DJIA remained around the 12000 level after the Fed said it will continue buying government bonds, while South Korean shares rose on news of faster-than-expected economic growth.  

 A top ECB official urged euro-zone governments to make their crisis fund more flexible so it can buy bonds of fiscally distressed governments and offer short-term credit lines.  

The U.S. sold its final warrants to purchase shares in Citigroup. The sale will yield a gain of $312.2 million, giving taxpayers an overall profit of $12.3 billion on the government's investment. 

 Kazakhmys hopes to raise up to $600 million by listing its stock in Hong Kong. Stock in the Kazakh copper miner already trades publicly in London.  

 Boeing said its delayed 787 program remains profitable, and outlined plans to revamp its best-selling 737 with a new plane that will arrive in 2020.  

 South Korea's economic growth slowed in the fourth quarter, but it is likely to pick up again due to healthy exports and a rebound in local demand.  

 Japan's central bank has done what it can to fight the country's recession and persistent deflation, the country's new minister for economy and fiscal policy said.  

 Fitch lowered Taiwan's local-currency credit rating by one notch to double-A-minus due to the island's high public debt and lagging fiscal revenue growth.  

 China raised the minimum down payment on purchases of second homes to 60%, in its latest effort to curb property prices.  

 Lenovo's chairman predicted increased investment in the U.S. from China's companies and its sovereign-wealth fund.  

 A U.S. judge has limited for now Motorola Solutions' ability to close the $1.2 billion sale of its telecom-network-equipment business after an intellectual-property suit brought by Huawei.  

 China accused Carrefour and Wal-Mart of deceptive pricing at some locations, and ordered local authorities to impose fines.  

 Obama challenged lawmakers to rise above partisan divisions to tackle problems that will allow the U.S. to compete globally, calling on Congress to find cuts and invest more money in education, infrastructure and research.  

Egyptian antigovernment activists staged a second day of protests around Cairo despite an official ban, but police quickly moved in and used tear gas and beatings to disperse the demonstrators. 

 Afghanistan's Karzai inaugurated the newly elected parliament and took a dig at international critics, ending a six-month power vacuum during which he ruled by decree.  

 Two prominent Chinese dissidents said Hong Kong's government denied them entry to attend the Jan. 28 funeral of democracy activist Szeto Wah.  

An explosion in a coal mine in Colombia killed at least 20 miners and injured six others.