PARIS—Airbus said Thursday that it was placed under formal investigation by an investigating magistrate for alleged involuntary manslaughter concerning the 2009 crash of an Air France Airbus A330 in the Atlantic Ocean. 

Lawyers from the European plane maker and Airbus Chief Executive  Tom Enders met with the investigating magistrate Thursday. 

Being placed under formal investigation is one stage short of formal charges, and allows judicial authorities more time to pursue their investigation of the case. 

"I confirm that the legal entity Airbus has been placed under investigation by the investigating magistrate in relation to the Air France Flight 447 tragedy," Mr. Enders said in a statement. 

"On behalf of Airbus, I have noted the absence of facts supporting this step and stated our strong disagreement," he said. Airbus is a unit of European Aeronautic Defence & Space Co. 

Mr. Enders said Airbus continues to believe that the investigation "should focus on finding the cause of this accident and making sure it can never happen again." 

"Airbus will continue to support the investigation, including the continued search for the flight recorders, which is the only sure way to know the truth," he was quoted as saying. 

The crash of Air France flight AF447 killed all 228 people aboard en route from Rio de Janeiro to Paris June 1, 2009. Investigators have suspected that faulty air-speed indicators on the plane were a contributing factor to the accident, but nothing has been proved. No charges have been brought in the case. 

Three searches for the flight recorders on the ocean bed have been unsuccessful. A fourth search is due to start March 20 using a minisubmarine. 

Officials from Air France and lawyers for the airline have been summoned for a meeting with the examining magistrate Friday, a spokeswoman for Air France-KLM, the Franco-Dutch company that owns Air France, said. 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Airbus is facing charges over the 2009 crash of an Air France jet. Earlier headlines incorrectly named Air France.

 Write to  David Pearson at david.pearson@dowjones.com 