I first met  Mario Buatta, one of America's most celebrated interior designers—the so-called Prince of Chintz, he is the subject of a tribute dinner on March 9 thrown by the New York School of Interior Design—when we were seated next to each other at some sort of charity event several years ago. I don't spend a lot of time hobnobbing with interior designers (our home is decorated by the firm of Gardner and Gardner, and feel free to throw in a couple of extra Gardners if you include our kids' bedroom and their distinctive touches), so it's not as if I had many preconceived notions of how decorators are supposed to behave.

Nonetheless, with a clientele that includes the Newhouse clan, Henry Ford II, Barbara Walters and Blair House, the official state guest residence across the street from the White House, I suppose I was expecting a figure of high stuffiness, a snob of such refined taste and exquisite social antennae that he'd cut me off at the knees as soon as he realized I didn't have the pedigree, or certainly the budget, to make conversation interesting. 

Mr. Buatta quickly disabused me of that notion, and anybody else at the table who might not have known him previously—though I expect everybody else did, the decorator seeming to know people everywhere he goes, from all strata of society and introducing himself when he doesn't—by producing from his pocket a pair of chattering teeth. 

My recollection is that he might also have donned a wig: not an expensive hairpiece but a piece of matted fur pulled from another pocket and plopped unceremoniously on his head.

Mario Buatta, the so-called Prince of Chintz, is a celebrated interior designer. Here's a look at a 10-bedroom "pied-a-terre" in Manhattan that he decorated with his signature style.





However, he spared us "Harold, my pocket pet," a plastic cockroach on a nylon string, though I can't state with any confidence that his telescopic fork didn't also make an appearance. "You could steal from people across the table," he explained as we had lunch one recent afternoon at Swifty's, the Upper East Side watering hole, where the dimensions of the tables were intimate enough that he limited himself to restaurant-supplied utensils. 

"I gave one to  Nan Kempner," he added, referring to the society icon who died in 2005. "She lived on that for years." The challenge of dining long-distance perhaps explaining her fashionably starved physique. 

"I wear a joke wig from Ricky's; my newest has bangs," Mr. Buatta went on, corroborating my memory of the evening we first met. He reported that he doesn't limit his toupee to dinner parties, but may just as well produce it at client meetings. 

"You catch them off guard and you can tell if you're going to get along with them," he said.

Mr. Buatta grew up on Staten Island, the son of society bandleader  Phil Burton; he said his father played at the old Savoy Plaza Hotel, where the General Motors Building now stands on Fifth Avenue and 58th Street. Mr. Buatta originally intended to become an architect and enrolled at Cooper Union, but didn't last long. "I didn't care where the pipes were," he explained. "I cared where the throw pillows were." 

He attributes his affection for chintz to his beloved, larger-than-life Aunt May. "She had summer chintzes and winter chintzes," he said.

Mr. Buatta's predisposition to the warm and colorful, and undoubtedly his sight gags, helped endear him to high-society clientele starting in the early '60s, when he went into business on his own after apprenticing in  B. Altman's decorating department. Indeed, on the way to his table at Swifty's he stopped at virtually every table to exchange greetings with the likes of gossip columnist  Liz Smith, socialite  Cynthia Lufkin and a gentleman in pinstripes whom Mr. Buatta couldn't immediately place but who demanded: "You're coming down to address the meeting in Lyford Cay, aren't you?" 

"I was doing chintz when everybody else was doing chrome and steel," Mr. Buatta explained. 

At 75, he's only now recovered from a blood infection that landed him in the hospital and then a nursing home for several months last year. He still suffers the lingering effects of a spinal operation that left two fingers on his right hand bent and immobile. "I shake people's hand and they think I'm giving them the finger," he said. 

 The March 9 dinner at the Metropolitan Club will help establish the New York School of Interior Design's Mario Buatta Materials Atelier. "They're going to have a panel discussion with a couple of people who worked for me dissect my style," the decorator explained. "I'm going to bring a carton of eggs."

While Mr. Buatta realizes the value of the "Prince of Chintz" moniker in helping distinguish his brand, it actually doesn't do him justice, as a visit after lunch to a longtime California client's 10-bedroom "pied-a-terre" at the Sherry-Netherland hotel made clear. Chintz was in evidence but not overwhelmingly so. 

What distinguished the apartment more than anything was its exquisite coziness, its lived-in feeling, even though it is apparently hardly lived in at all, its sublime sense of order, harmony and unapologetic beauty against the chaos of the outside world (the apartment's views of Grand Army Plaza, of Central Park South all the way to the Time Warner Center and of Central Park notwithstanding.)

The irony is that Mr. Buatta is a voracious consumer of popular culture—his clients also include  Mariah Carey, whose TriBeCa apartment he designed a decade ago and whose nursery he's doing at the moment, and  Billy Joel—even as he misses few opportunities to bemoan it. Indeed, he'd spent much of the morning we met watching a special about the Hilton sisters on TV. "I met them once at Bergdorf Goodman with their parents," he remembered. "The mother is beautiful. But the things they did; they're so flirtatious and they became fashion models."

It was impossible to tell whether he was approving or aghast—but deep down one suspects it was the former, and completely so.

 Corrections and Amplifications 

A photograph accompanying this article shows a facade bookshelf that contains a fake book spine with the title "Hints From the Prince of Chintz" by Mr. Buatta. In an earlier version of this article, the photograph's caption incorrectly implied that the shelf and book were real.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 