Wanda Jackson hesitantly sets up a corny joke like the 73-year-old grandmother she is: "How do you call a deaf duck?"

"Hey duck!" she hollers with a drawn-out snarl that could peel paint, suddenly recognizable as the Queen of Rockabilly.

More than 50 years ago, Ms. Jackson became a rock-'n'-roll pioneer with that throaty growl, an incongruously sweet singing voice and daring outfits that got her into trouble at the Grand Ole Opry. Despite a sound that helped define her genre, with blistering records including "Let's Have a Party" and "Mean Mean Man," Ms. Jackson is little known among casual rock fans.

Over the decades, however, waves of latter-day garage rockers have discovered her, prizing her raw edge and her role in rock's origin story. As a teen country singer from Oklahoma, she dated a young Elvis Presley and, with his urging, adopted his revved-up sound. This cachet has kept her working the road about 150 days a year, especially in Europe. 

Listen to two songs from 'The Party Ain't Over'

Now, one of her admirers has orchestrated a project that is pumping fresh blood into Ms. Jackson's living-legend act. Jack White, the leader of the White Stripes and at age 35 one of the most influential rock artists of his generation, produced Ms. Jackson's latest album, which will be released next Tuesday. The 11 songs on "The Party Ain't Over" showcase the range of styles she has worked in, from country blues ("Busted," written by Harlan Howard) to gospel ("Dust on the Bible," co-written by Johnny and Walter Bailes). The album features Mr. White on guitar and his handpicked band.

Ms. Jackson says she had cold feet about the project at first. She blanched at some of the songs Mr. White sent for her consideration, including "You Know That I'm No Good" by the British retro-soul bad girl Amy Winehouse. "I can't do this kind of material," Ms. Jackson recalled saying. Wearing a zebra-print shirt and glittering earrings, she gestured to her manager—and husband of 50 years—Wendell Goodman, sitting next to her in her publicist's office in New York last fall. "He drug me kicking and screaming into the studio." 

Once on Mr. White's Nashville home turf, they struck an easy rapport, and they recorded the Winehouse track during the first session. "We said, why don't we just let go of the reins and give them to Jack? That's when my attitude changed," she said. "I've been in the business so long, people are almost afraid to tell me what to do. But he knew exactly what he wanted from my performance, and that made it easier."

The project follows an increasingly familiar and attractive blueprint for veteran acts: A young artist with marquee status of his own lends production skills along with his influence on a new audience. Soul and gospel great Mavis Staples, 71 years old, is up for a Grammy for an album she recorded with 43-year-old Jeff Tweedy, the lead singer of rock band Wilco. Last year, indie-rock auteurs Okkervil River had co-billing on an album that they produced for '60s psych legend Roky Erickson. And in 2004, Mr. White produced and performed on an album by Loretta Lynn, "Van Lear Rose," which resulted in two Grammy awards and one of the most successful crossover releases of her career. 

Collaborations with younger artists have become a popular model for aging greats. Some notable examples:

To cede the spotlight to Ms. Jackson, Mr. White declined to be interviewed about her album, but he and his house band are backing the singer at concerts this week to set up the album's release. He also appears in a new video for "Thunder on the Mountain," a stomping rockabilly tune by Bob Dylan (who picked the song for Ms. Jackson, she says, after Mr. White called him for suggestions).

A series of boosts from music stars have helped propel Ms. Jackson's career over the decades. After touring with Elvis and scoring a hit in Japan with 1958's "Fujiyama Mama," she recorded both rock and country records for the Decca and Capitol labels. But she walked away in 1971 to focus on gospel music, and didn't return to secular music until the mid-1980s. In 2009, she was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, thanks in part to endorsements by Elvis Costello, Bruce Springsteen and Mr. Dylan, who campaigned on her behalf on his satellite-radio program. "He said, 'This Oklahoma girl is a tornado with lipstick,' " Ms. Jackson said with a chuckle.

Yet the fanfare of the induction left Ms. Jackson feeling at loose ends. "After the comedown, she said, what's left to do?" Mr. Goodman recalled. In hopes of keeping momentum, they began pursuing the idea of an album of duets with younger acts. They reached out to Mr. White, but he said he'd prefer to work with Ms. Jackson on something from scratch. 

They recorded over two short sessions last winter in the studio Mr. White built in a former barn behind his home in Nashville. Arriving tired and laryngitic from yet another run of concerts in Europe, Ms. Jackson found herself struggling to dig past her familiar stage routine and summon the original Wanda Jackson. Her new producer spurred her with a constant refrain from the control booth: "Push." Before the drum beat kicks off the song "You Know That I'm No Good," Ms. Jackson can be heard remarking to herself in the studio, "I always have to push." 

With "Shakin All Over" (released in 1960 by Johnny Kidd and the Pirates), the album opens with a blast of horns, Mr. White's pealing electric guitar and Ms. Jackson's shuddering moans. It closes with him strumming an acoustic guitar as she trills Jimmie Rodgers's "Blue Yodel #6," setting her growl aside. "The tough and the sweet," she said. "I like that." 

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 