They're spreading like an epidemic, striking down players one by one. Oblique injuries have become the scourge of Yankees spring training, felling Joba Chamberlain, Sergio Mitre, Greg Golson and now Curtis Granderson, whose status for opening day is in jeopardy. 

The obliques are a broad, flat band of muscle that connects to the pelvis and helps to rotate the hip. Chamberlain, Mitre and Golson are on the mend with their oblique problems, but Granderson's injury could keep him out for a while. 

With so many oblique issues, the Yankees are asking themselves whether something about their training regimen is causing the issue—as they wondered in 2007 when a rash of hamstring problems knocked out players like Hideki Matsui, Chien Ming Wang and Mike Mussina.

Could there be a connection between the kind of training the Yankees are doing and the oblique problems? 

"I think it's just part of the rigors of spring training," manager Joe Girardi said. "Every year there seems to be one thing, in one camp. And a lot of years, you don't necessarily even change what you did the year before, and it could have been something totally different from last year. It just happens." 

Granderson has an internal oblique strain, similar to Chamberlain's problem.

 The Yankee players have certainly been putting their heads together about the rash of oblique problems, Granderson said.

"It's more freak than anything, I'm still kind of puzzled as to the what and the why. And what's going on with now the fourth guy with it,'' Granderson said. 

A top New York doctor thinks there may be a unifying cause, however.

 Orthopedist Dr. Jonathan Glashow is co-chair of sports medicine at Mt. Sinai hospital. He said that he and the trainers he works with are seeing more oblique injuries of late, as a focus on core strength— primarily the abdominals—makes the obliques weaker by comparison. 

"There's been a rash of focus on core strengthening, the generic core. But it's not so simple. If you strengthen part of the core more than another part of the core, it creates an imbalance and leads to these oblique injuries," Glashow said.

 "I don't know if it's this training regimen that's brought this rash of them on, because I never remember hearing about all these oblique injuries." 

Baseball players entering spring training may have done significant core work in the offseason, or have upper abdominal and back muscles that are more developed than their lower equivalents.

 When they suddenly ramp it up for spring training, the obliques aren't always ready. 

"Seeing players, it seems like what's happening is that the exercises they're doing preseason may be creating a little more muscular imbalance, and then they really push it with their first exposure to this explosive rotation. Baseball's an all-or-nothing sport, and when you go all out, you stretch these muscles that aren't perhaps quite ready yet," Glashow said. 

Granderson said team doctors asked him if he had changed his routines at all, and he said he had not.

"A lot of people are trying to see if I've done anything more or less or different, as far as my day-to-day routine," Granderson said. "Everything feels similar, in terms of the amount of working out I've been doing, the conditioning I've been doing—all that stuff seems very similar."

Girardi also suggested that the heat could be a cause for the oblique problems, with a series of hot days and no rainouts this spring.

 "Maybe it's the heat. It's hot, guys get dehydrated, it could be part of it," Girardi said. "Last year, they were hydrated. It rained on them every day," he joked. 

But Dr. Glashow poured cold water on that theory, saying that heat would be likely to help, not hinder.

"To the contrary, when it's warmer out, they're a little more flexible,'' he said. "If it was colder, maybe that could be a cause.''

The last time the Yankees had a similar rash of injuries—in 2007—their response was to change their workout equipment and routine.