FRANKFURT—Portugal's latest sale of short-term debt was largely stress-free, a significant change from recent months, as the cost of those funds fell sharply from the previous auction.

But analysts remained cautious, suggesting that a better test will come when the government issues longer-term debt, which attracts more interest from foreign investors. The improvement in investor sentiment remains fragile, they noted, and that the country is still paying a high price to borrow because of speculation that it may still outside help to pay its debts. 

The government could announce Thursday whether it plans to sell bonds next week via an auction.

Wednesday, Portugal sold a planned €750 million ($1.0 billion) in 12-month Treasury bills at an average yield of 4.029%, sharply down from 5.281% at the previous auction for the same maturity on Dec. 1.

"The good result at [the auction] will likely reassure investors, but we continue to lean on the cautious side as underlying sentiment remains fragile and uncertainty is still high," said  Chiara Cremonesi, a strategist at UniCredit Bank in London. 

The country's deputy finance minister called the results "very satisfactory" and noted that the country's latest three debt sales were executed under "constantly more favorable conditions." 

"During this month [our debt issue]...ran in a way which was better than the issue in the last quarter," particularly in November and December, the official, Carlos Costa Pina, said. 

He said the results were evidence that the financial markets are beginning to take note of the positive measures being taken to reduce the country's budget deficit. The government has long insisted that it doesn't need to follow Ireland and Greece and request a bailout and has implemented a mix of spending cuts and tax increases to shore up its finances. 

Portugal has lower debt than Greece and no banking problems comparable with Ireland's. But Portugal suffers from chronically low economic growth, which combined with high borrowing costs makes it hard to stem its rising debt, economists say. 

The strong sale continues a pattern that began last week, when debt sales from Portugal and Spain, among others, went better than expected. Wednesday's sale helped reduce the yield premium that investors have demanded for the added risk of holding Portugese debt instead of that from Germany, the euro zone's defacto benchmark. The Portuguese 10-year yield dropped to 6.822%, compared to 3.11% from Germany, as the gap shrunk by 0.119 percentage point.

An analyst at ratings agency Moody's Investors Service said the results of the auction wouldn't change its view on the government's debt. "These are short-term fluctuations and the results from various auctions are quite dramatically different," said  Anthony Thomas, a senior analyst in the sovereign risk group. "The rate that Portugal has to pay will be an important factor in our review, but it's not going to turn on the result of one auction." 

Treasury bills are short-term debt, typically with maturities of up to 12-months but some countries also issue 18-month T-bills. These bills are predominantly bought by domestic investors, in contrast to government bonds, which are considered more indicative of foreign investor appetite. 

At the auction, the bid-to-cover ratio, which shows demand compared with the amount sold, rose to 3.1 from 2.5.

—Alex MacDonald in Lisbon contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Emese Bartha at emese.bartha@dowjones.com 