New Jersey's Republican Gov. Chris Christie has joked that he might run for president in 2016 since he'll likely need a job come 2013, such are his re-election prospects.

Give the governor credit for modesty. He's got a 48% approval rating, which isn't shabby in a state where Democrats outnumber Republicans by 15 points. In fact, the Republican governor would likely be sitting pretty if he didn't have a potential Democratic challenger in Newark Mayor Cory Booker who might be even more popular.

A recent Public Policy Polling survey shows Mr. Booker running neck and neck with Mr. Christie in a hypothetical match-up. But while Mr. Booker and Mr. Christie have similar favorability ratings, Mr. Christie's negatives are nearly 30 points higher. That's because Mr. Christie has irked public unions by demanding reductions in their pensions and pay. Mr. Booker, on the other hand, has cast himself more as a centrist by undertaking more popular reforms.

The Newark mayor has drawn praise among parents and education reformers for expanding charter and magnet schools and reducing the minority achievement gap. Because of Mr. Booker's reforms, Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg rewarded Newark with a $100 million education grant last year. The mayor's policies have also reduced the city's murder and rape rate by 40%, one of the largest crime-rate reductions in the nation.

In a meeting with Wall Street Journal editors recently, Mr. Christie talked about how he and Mr. Booker have worked closely together on reforms like expanding charters, capping local property taxes and labor arbitration. Mr. Christie acknowledged that Mr. Booker has higher political ambitions and could make a formidable opponent but said that he didn't want to think about the 2013 election right now. He has enough on his plate this year with balancing the state budget and reforming the pension system. Nonetheless, he said that he hopes Mr. Booker doesn't run.

For his part, Mr. Booker is keeping his cards close to his vest. The mayor isn't term-limited, so he could run for re-election in 2014. In an interview with Newsweek magazine last month, Mr. Booker said that "there might now be a strong argument to stick around for a third term," adding that "right now, I've got three school years to do some very good work. But then I'm going to have to assess where I think I can make the most difference." Some political insiders say that Mr. Booker has presidential ambitions. If so, his next move will likely position him in the national spotlight.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.