(See Correction & Amplification below .)

  J.P. Ricciardi came to the Mets in November after eight years as the Toronto Blue Jays' general manager—eight years of running a team that only once finished higher than third in Major League Baseball's best division.

 So now that Mr. Ricciardi is a special assistant to Mets general manager Sandy Alderson, the prospect of having to wrench supremacy in the National League East away from the Philadelphia Phillies doesn't fill him with much apprehension.

"The AL East always had two or three teams coming at you," he said by phone recently. "After having done it so many years against the Yankees and the Red Sox and Tampa being good through that cycle, I'll take my chances. Even though the Phillies are really good, I'll take my chances over here."

All of the three main front-office hires the Mets made this offseason—Mr. Alderson, Mr. Ricciardi and vice president Paul DePodesta—had previously been general managers. But Mr. Ricciardi, 51, stands out among them for various reasons.

 Of the trio, he is the only one who played baseball professionally and who didn't build a playoff team during his years as a GM. He's the most outspoken. And he relies, he said, more on "emotional-quotient type thinking" in evaluating talent.

As the man in charge of the Mets' pro scouting department, Mr. Ricciardi has had a hand in the incremental additions the team has made to its roster over the last two months. The Mets have signed three pitchers—righties D.J. Carrasco and Taylor Buchholz and lefty Chris Capuano—and catcher Ronny Paulino, none of whom will earn more than $1.5 million next season in base salary.

The Mets have been relegated to such small, cost-effective moves in part because of their lack of payroll flexibility and in part because their front office wants to be prudent. But presuming the Mets eventually peel off some of their more burdensome contracts, the franchise's player-personnel people will be freed to act more boldly, and Mr. Ricciardi's role will become even more important.

 It will be on Mr. Ricciardi and his staff to pinpoint those players who might help the Mets right away. In Toronto, he handed out several pricey contracts to players who proved unproductive (such as Alex Rios and Frank Thomas), but he also developed the Blue Jays' pitching staff into one whose earned-run average ranked among the six best in the American League every year from 2005 to 2008.

He had played two years in the Mets' low minor leagues in the early 1980s and worked as an instructor and coach in the Oakland Athletics organization before A's GM Billy Beane, his friend and former teammate, elevated him to the A's vice president of player personnel. From those experiences, Mr. Ricciardi appreciates the value of statistical analysis but isn't quite as committed to its revelatory powers as Mr. Alderson and Mr. DePodesta, his Harvard-educated colleagues, are.

"I'm probably more old school with a new-school twist to it," he said. "I look at the stats before I see the player, or I look at the player then go look at the stats. I don't just go in there and say, 'The stats mean nothing.' [But] I think my player-development eye and my evaluation eye probably allow me to be a little bit more objective."

He had, he said, easier routes available to him. He could have kept his job as an ESPN analyst. He could have accepted a standing offer from Boston general manager Theo Epstein to join the Red Sox's front office, which Mr. Ricciardi called "the model operation of how to run a major-league team."

 In the end, though, he considered the opportunity with the Mets "too good to pass up," and in a way, how could he not? Having won the NL East four consecutive years, the Phillies will be formidable again. The Atlanta Braves are coming off a playoff berth themselves. But no Yankees? No Red Sox? No Rays? For Mr. Ricciardi, this is living.

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 

 Correction & Amplification 

The Toronto Blue Jays finished second in the American League Eastern Division in 2006. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said Toronto never finished better than third in the division during J.P. Ricciardi's eight years as their general manager. 