Earlier this month, Hong Kong's Chief Secretary Henry Tang finally named Britain's Foster + Partners as the winning master-plan designer of the US$2.8 billion West Kowloon Cultural District. The announcement was a milestone, but hardly the final step in a long process that will unfold over the next two decades.

The selection came after 13 years of public debate, hundreds of presentations, thousands of committee meetings, the resignations of a couple of high-profile executives, and tens of millions of dollars in billable hours and preproject funding. Sir Norman Foster's firm beat out two other finalists, Rem Koolhaas's Office for Metropolitan Architecture and the local practice Rocco Design Architects.

  See renderings of the three proposed designs for the West Kowloon Cultural District, including the winning one by Norman Foster. 

Standing at a podium making the announcement, Mr. Tang, who is also chairman of the West Kowloon Cultural District Authority, said: "The public's voice now is loud and clear: 'Move on and get the job done.'" 

Once it is complete—assuming there are no more major hitches—the project could demonstrate that with enough money and effort, a city can create a globally relevant culture scene from scratch. 

"Hong Kong needs this. We need it as we are looking for our own identity and our future," says Andrew Lam, an urban planner and member of the West Kowloon Cultural District Authority board. 

An arts hub the likes of West Kowloon Cultural District is the current must-have for many growing cities. It stems from the thinking that for a city to be an attractive location—for living, working and visiting—it needs a thriving and dynamic cultural scene. 

"The cultural arts hub is on every major city's list of key interests," says Carolyn Cartier, a professor of cultural globalization and China studies at the University of Technology, Sydney. "It has become understood that creative industries—encompassing everything from design, architecture, software and theater—are essential for urban growth." She says the idea has spread around the world as city mayors share policy information and attend the same conferences.

In China, every major city seems to be sprouting an arts district. Just a few hours by train from Hong Kong, for instance, vast culture zones in Guangzhou's Zhujiang New Town and Shenzhen's Baoan have emerged in the past five years. Further north, Shanghai has an arts development in Pudong on the drawing board, and Beijing has plans to build three major museums close to the National Stadium, known as the Bird's Nest. Meanwhile, South Korea plans to pour $10 billion into its Seoul Creative City and Abu Dhabi will spend $27 billion on a cultural hub on Saadiyat Island, which will include a sister museum to the Louvre in Paris.

All of these projects—many of which are complete or nearly complete—came along after Hong Kong's plan for a West Kowloon Cultural District was first announced. 

Introduced in a 1998 policy speech by former Hong Kong Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa, the Cultural District was meant to transform the city into a world-class arts destination.

The project to convert 40 hectares of reclaimed land was initially awarded to Mr. Foster in 2001, based on his proposal for a giant glass canopy over the site, which sits near the Elements mall in western Kowloon. But that decision was overturned in 2005 after a public outcry, played out in the local media, over the government's essentially handing over prime real estate to a single developer. After a series of consultations, the Hong Kong government ordered a new round of bidding in 2009. 

Meanwhile, as governments in post-credit crunch Europe and the U.S. slashed their arts and culture budgets, the city set aside a whopping $2.8 billion endowment to pay for the mammoth cultural project. Each of the three finalist architectural firms was given $5.1 million to pitch its master plan, a huge sum for such a competition. 

Says Prof. Cartier, who has studied Hong Kong's struggles with West Kowloon: "The debate over West Kowloon has been successful in some ways so far because it led to the realization that you can't just build a set of several boxy museums, have limited collections with which to fill them, and then call the buildings a cultural center." 



Indeed, recent history has shown that pouring money into a large construction project doesn't guarantee results: In the late 1990s, for instance, several cities across Asia—Hong Kong included—aspired to create their own versions of Silicon Valley. Kuala Lumpur had its $20 billion Multimedia Super Corridor; Phuket laid out plans for a Greater Phuket Digital Paradise; and let's not forget Hong Kong's $2 billion Cyberport. Today, the Super Corridor is anything but, and Cyberport is primarily a residential development.

Foster + Partners's winning design for the West Kowloon Cultural District, in keeping with the government brief, will offer 17 cultural venues—including an opera house and a 15,000-seat outdoor arena—plus extensive arts-education facilities and commercial areas. A waterside public park will take up nearly half the land of the district and an underground transport network is supposed to be environmentally friendly. 

The crown jewel will be the M+ Museum, a contemporary art museum that the government expects will attract two million visitors a year, the same number that New York's Museum of Modern Art draws. The city has granted M+ $128 million to acquire artwork and $600 million to build the museum's 7,200-square-meter space. 

Of course, with such an ambitious blueprint, the completion of the district is decades away: According to the plans, the first phase of the West Kowloon district should open by 2015; the final phase will be finished in 2031. However, Colin Ward, the Hong Kong-based Foster + Partners architect heading the project, says that government rules permitting, some events, such as tree plantings and pop-up exhibits, may roll out soon. M+ executive director Lars Nittve intends to start doing pop-up shows as soon as next January.

But Hong Kong culture critic and art curator Oscar Ho, who also teaches culture studies at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and is a member of the West Kowloon Cultural District consultation panel, says he thinks the choice of Foster + Partners as the master-plan designer was too conservative. 

"It's always the 'no surprise, not challenging one' that wins," says Mr. Ho. "Art is about being unusual and risky, but obviously not for WKCD. The nice thing about Foster's design is, if things do get messed up, at least we will still have a park."

Most Hong Kong residents, adds Mr. Ho, don't care about or want the project. He interviewed about a hundred residents of Yaumatei district, which borders the project site, and more than 70% said West Kowloon had nothing to do with them.

"Some of the most expensive luxurious apartments are [near the Cultural District]. But across a main street on the other side is one of the poorest districts in Hong Kong. How would [the cultural district] be meaningful to the poor community?…WKCD will be dead if there isn't a strong local presence that speaks to the people," says Mr. Ho.

In some ways, although the decision to use Foster + Partners's master plan marks significant progress in the West Kowloon Cultural District process, it is just the start of more rounds of public consultations this summer. The earliest that construction bids on key Cultural District structures such as M+ can begin is the end of this year. 

One upside to the West Kowloon Cultural District process is that it has energized local arts groups and brought a fresh wave of international star architects, culture theorists and urban planners to Hong Kong. 

A few days before the master plan was awarded, Mr. Koolhaas said: "Whatever happens, Hong Kong is a lifetime commitment. West Kowloon has helped us understand the city better." Despite losing out on West Kowloon, his firm's work in the city continues—the MTR Corp., the territory's mass-transit rail operator, has hired OMA to redesign its train stations.

Foster + Partners, which has long ties to the city—it designed Chep Lap Kok airport and HSBC's headquarters—is helping to convert part of the old Kai Tak Airport into a cruise-ship terminal. 

Mr. Yim's firm, a hometown favorite, is building the new Hong Kong government headquarters and the East Kowloon performing-arts center. 

Redesigning Hong Kong's future continues.