SAN FRANCISCO—California's cap-and-trade program is being threatened by groups of local residents, even after the ambitious climate plan survived an electoral challenge in November. 

Communities For A Better Environment, California Communities Against Toxics, Society For Positive Action and other groups and individuals have sued state regulators, claiming the climate plan won't reduce pollution. The plaintiffs argue that industrial facilities should cut their actual emissions, rather than trade rights to pollute. 

"All the evidence showed that cap-and-trade programs have failed environmental justice communities," said Alegria de la Cruz, an attorney with the Center on Race, Poverty & The Environment, who is representing the plaintiffs. Ms. De la Cruz said the Air Resources Board must "do some deep thinking on alternatives to the cap-and-trade system." 

The status of the cap-and-trade program, which is part of a plan to lower greenhouse-gas emissions to 1990 levels within a decade, was thrown into doubt after Superior Court Judge Ernest Goldsmith agreed with the plaintiffs in a Jan. 27 ruling. He said the Air Resources Board, which is tasked with lowering air pollution, hadn't conducted an adequate environmental review before it approved the plan. 

Judge Goldsmith is scheduled to issue a final ruling in the next few weeks. 

The legal challenge to the state's implementation of the climate law, known as AB 32, comes despite California's strong support for environmental legislation. In November, California voters defeated a ballot initiative backed by some oil refiners that sought to delay implementation of the climate law, including the cap-and-trade program, which is scheduled to start in January 2012. 

Some of the plaintiffs have had success with environmental lawsuits in the past. For example, Communities For A Better Environment has represented low-income residents in dozens of California administrative proceedings and lawsuits over the years, including a legal action in 2009 that derailed  Chevron Corp.'s
CVX


-0.69
%




 plans to expand its oil refinery in Richmond, Calif. 

Observers and participants said they don't expect the Superior Court to shut down the state's cap-and-trade program, but the case has caused jitters among some environmental groups. 

"If the plaintiffs are granted their request, then it would suspend the program," said Derek Walker, California climate director at Environmental Defense Fund. He said that would put "the state in danger of not meeting the 2020 obligation." 

Mr. Walker, whose organization strongly supports cap-and-trade, said he was "optimistic" the final court ruling would spare California's emissions-trading program. 

Under the program, the Air Resources Board plans to cap most of the state's carbon-dioxide emissions—primarily from power plants, vehicle fuels and heavy industry—and reduce that ceiling over eight years. Companies can trade pollution allowances issued by the state, as well as carbon credits tied to emission-reduction projects, such as forests managed to cut heat-trapping gases. 

Carbon-market participants said they expect the court to preserve California's cap-and-trade program, although the final ruling may cause a delay in implementation. 

The market for California carbon credits has been "generally quiet," although there has been daily trading activity, said John Battaglia, a carbon broker at Evolution Markets in San Francisco. He added that while uncertainty about the court case may have been weighing on the market, participants have been grappling with other issues, such as the availability of pollution permits and still-pending regulations governing the use of carbon credits. 

"The regulations are still evolving," Mr. Battaglia said. "It's just the nature of this nascent market." 

Between $3 billion and $75 billion of California carbon credits and pollution permits are expected to change hands during the eight years of the cap-and-trade program, according to an estimate by CantorCO2e, the environmental markets arm of Cantor Fitzgerald. 

Air Resources Board spokesman Stanley Young said the agency is "moving ahead with implementation of the cap-and-trade program," although he declined to discuss the case or whether a final court ruling might affect the program. 

Cathy Reheis-Boyd, chief operating officer of the Western States Petroleum Association, an oil industry group whose members will be required to cut emissions, said that while "there are a lot of business people who would be quite happy" to see the court sideline the state's cap-and-trade program, she didn't think that was likely to happen. 