 The battle for control of Macau casino tycoon Stanley Ho's fortune took another turn with differing public statements being released about the billionaire's wishes. The statements raised questions over what Ho's real intentions are among his four families, and who really represents him.  

 Investors in emerging markets face a much riskier landscape as a result of inflation. Central banks are trying to rein in rising prices, but doubts are emerging as to whether they are doing enough in the face of increasing food prices world-wide and rapid domestic economic growth.  

 The euro could keep sliding if the turmoil in Egypt sparks a broader scramble by investors out of risky investments and into safer bets, including the U.S. dollar and Swiss franc.  

 France and Germany pledged to find a comprehensive solution to the euro zone's institutional problems.  

 A growing band of central banks are throwing up obstacles to prevent floods of money from overwhelming their economies.  

 China will allow banks to trade currency swaps with corporate clients, extending the use of the financial derivative beyond the interbank market.  

 Japan said it will earmark $3.9 billion for strategic investments overseas through a government-affiliated financing body.  

 China targeted up to $12 billion for irrigation and related water projects and said water conservation will be the top agricultural priority this year.  

 The People's Bank of China must be vigilant on inflation and may need to tighten reserve requirements further to address rapid capital inflows, the central bank's governor warned.  

 Fourth-quarter profits for the biggest U.S. corporations have been strong, and 2010 is poised to deliver one of the best year-over-year gains since 1998.  

 Alpha Natural Resources reached a deal to buy rival coal company Massey Energy for $7.1 billion in cash and stock.  

 Nissan shot past rival Honda in global sales for the first time in decades to become Japan's second-largest auto maker.  

 Japan's Nippon Steel and JFE Holdings warned that costs related to massive flooding in Australia would take a big bite out of their profits this fiscal year.  

 Sumitomo Mitsui Financial will shuffle its management.  

 Protests raged across Egypt and reports of looting spread as demonstrations to oust President Mubarak continued despite the appointment of Omar Suleiman to the post of vice president.  

 Chinese authorities have blocked the word "Egypt" from searches on Twitter-like microblogging sites in an indication of concern among Communist Party leaders that the unrest there could encourage similar calls for political reform in China. 

The leader of a long-outlawed Tunisian Islamist party was welcomed at the airport by thousands of supporters as he returned after more than two decades in exile.

 Myanmar is expected to convene its first parliament in more than two decades Monday, setting the stage for the selection of a new president.  

 A top Japanese official raised questions over last week's surprise debt-rating cut, while also seeking to push the opposition to work with the government to get Japan's fiscal house in order.  

 A Chinese court gave a relatively light sentence to a police official's son whose hit-and-run killing of a student sparked nationwide anger.  