Connecticut coach Jim Calhoun had scanned the schedule before the tournament began and winced. For ninth-seeded UConn to win a championship, the Huskies would need to win five games in five days—including four straight against top-25 opponents.

It seemed worse than unlikely. As far as he knew, no one had ever done it before.

But he didn't count on the historic performance of one of his own players. Powered by Kemba Walker's record-shattering 130 points across the tournament's five games, UConn advanced to the finals, then defeated Louisville, 69-66, for its first Big East Championship since 2004. Now both schools will await their NCAA tournament seeds and travel destinations Sunday.

"I'm caught up in the emotion of what happened here," said Calhoun, who notched his 600th win. "They wouldn't allow themselves to lose."

Walker grinned out at the media after the game.

"Now that the tournament's over, I definitely can tell you that I was tired," said Walker, who was named the Most Valuable Player. "With about two minutes left, I was gas. I just wanted to win this game so bad that my heart took over."

Both teams entered the season unranked and largely overlooked. Louisville (25-9) was picked to finish eighth in the Big East and did not receive a single vote in the Associated Press' preseason poll. Throughout the season, each struggled. Ten Cardinals players suffered injuries that caused them to miss playing time during the year, while the Huskies (26-9) tinkered with 10 different lineups.

But both clawed their way into the polls, though UConn entered the Big East Tournament on shakier ground, ending the regular season on a two-game losing streak and finishing 9-9 in the Big East.

Walker came into this year with little reason to suspect the heroics ahead. As a sophomore, he averaged a solid and unspectacular 11.7 points per game. But he quickly carved out a pivotal role in UConn's ascent, averaging 37.6 minutes a game and becoming the only Huskies player to score in every start. Through four games in the Big East Tournament, he had scored 111 points, already a tournament record. His last-second basket catapulted UConn past top-ranked Pitt in the quarterfinals Thursday, while his 33-point performance powered the Huskies past Syracuse in the semifinals.

Against Louisville, Walker hovered in the air, time operating differently around his body as it had all week. Sometimes the world seemed to still as he held the ball. At other moments, it seemed as though someone had pressed the fast-forward button for a highlight reel exclusively focused on him.

He tore slits in defenses with the ruthlessness of an avant-garde contestant snipping fabric on "Project Runway," on his way to a game-high 19 points.

But Louisville senior Preston Knowles—who scored 10 of his 20 points against Notre Dame with 2:47 left in the game and overtime—would not let his grip on a championship in his senior season loosen so easily. Connecticut led by as many as 14 points during the first half, but consecutive three-pointers by Knowles with less than two minutes left, his first points of the game, sliced the Huskies' lead to six by halftime.

Louisville took the lead less than four minutes into the second half on the strength of an 8-0 run. But Connecticut snatched it back quickly on back-to-back dunks by Alex Oriakhi and Jeremy Lamb. Several times the Huskies seemed on the verge of bounding away, but Louisville, led by Knowles, who scored a team-high 18 points, reeled them back in.

As the final minutes ticked down, Knowles scored seven straight points for Louisville, giving the Cardinals a 64-63 lead with just under two minutes remaining, including a shot that danced across the rim before tipping through. Knowles pumped his fist.

On the next possession, Walker dribbled around the edge of the three-point line then dished under the basket to Lamb, who scored to push the Huskies ahead by one point. Louisville called timeout with 26.8 seconds on the clock as a "Let's Go Huskies" chant thundered through the arena. "As soon as the game started, I told my teammates it's really a home game for us," Walker said. "It seemed like it was all UConn."

After Louisville threw away its inbounds pass, and Walker converted two free throws, UConn led 67-64 with 16.4 seconds left. Knowles missed his attempt to tie, but Walker fouled Louisville's Mike Marra as he lofted a desperation three-pointer with time running out.

Marra sank the first shot, 67-65. The second shot clanged off the rim, and Marra winced. He nailed his third shot—another mistake. UConn converted two free throws to push the lead back to three in the final seconds, and the Cardinals' last shot glanced out.

The Huskies streamed to the center of the court, leaping and yelling in elation. It was an improbable end to an unlikely climb. UConn entered the Big East Tournament dogged by an announcement of several NCAA sanctions against the program, including the suspension of Calhoun for three games next year.

Somehow, the Huskies emerged as the feel-good story of the tournament, with gritty play that carried them through one of the most grueling stretch of games in NCAA history, to Walker's emergence as a star. His 6-foot-1 size makes an NBA career an open question, but his sustained heroics captivated crowds throughout the week.

"Words can't explain it," Walker said. "It's special."