The phone calls come once every several years. Somewhere, a team will be losing baseball games at an astonishing rate. And invariably, the living members of the 1962 New York Mets will be asked for their opinion. Nearly half a century after they set a modern record by losing 120 games, they remain the nation's foremost authorities on prolonged ineptitude.

"I kind of hate the phone calls about it," said Al Jackson, a starting pitcher on the '62 Mets. "People make fun of it, sure, but they didn't live through it. I lived through this. I could have had a heart attack. That's how bad I felt."

Home run hitters chase Barry Bonds. Strikeout pitchers chase Nolan Ryan. Awful teams chase—or rather, run from—the '62 Mets. For all the records that have failed to withstand the test of time, the one set by the inaugural Mets team remains intact.

When this year's Mets team lost 13 of their first 18 games, they evoked memories of their 1962 brethren. But by returning to the realm of the merely mediocre, the 2011 Mets serve as a reminder of just how difficult it is to be as bad as they were 49 years ago.

These Mets may not be a contending team. But woeful? Dreadful? Miserable? Fans who use those words to describe this year's Mets may need a history lesson, former players from the '62 team say.

"Talent-wise, between the team of '62 and the one now, there is no comparison at all," said Jackson, who is now a Mets minor-league pitching consultant. "None whatsoever, because there's talent on this ballclub.''

At least this year, the Mets have had their moments. They managed to win six games in a row in April. And entering Friday, they had won five of their last seven.

Back then? Well, consider this: The 1962 Mets lost their first nine games, lost 17 games in a row at one point and never won more than three in a row. They finished a whopping 60 games out of first place. They were shut out six times and lost by double-digits seven times.

"We started off bad," said Felix Mantilla, the Mets' starting third baseman in 1962. "In the middle of the season, we were bad. And at the end of the season, we were bad. There was no in-between. We were bad the whole year."

It wasn't just the sheer number of losses that made the '62 Mets unlike any sports team the city had seen. It was the way they lost them.

In their first game, they allowed allowed 11 runs and committed three errors. In their final game, they hit into a triple play. So it went from April through September.

"We lost games by every which way that you would ever think about losing a ballgame," said Frank Thomas, the Mets' left fielder in '62. "You wonder sometimes how things like that can happen."

Casey Stengel, the Mets' manager in '62, once famously asked, "Can't anybody here play this game?" The answer was best summed up by "Marvelous" Marv Throneberry, the first baseman who came to symbolize that season with his bumbling defensive play and base-running blunders.

When the team brought Stengel a cake on his birthday, Throneberry asked why he didn't get one on his birthday. In a story that has been told and retold, Stengel is said to have replied, "We was gonna get you a birthday cake, but we figured you'd drop it."

Their ineptitude was a byproduct of a failed expansion draft. The Mets ended up with a mix of established veterans who were well past their prime and young players who would never have a prime.

So dreadful were the Mets and the other expansion team that year, the Houston Colt .45s, that the National League held a second draft for them after the 1963 season. But the .45s, who later became the Astros, lost only 96 games in 1962. The Mets were an atrocity unto themselves.

In the Majors Since 1900

And yet, New York loved them. They were a ramshackle team playing in a dilapidated stadium. Yet they somehow managed to draw an average of 11,532 fans per game at the Polo Grounds, the 12th-highest mark in the 20-team league.

This year, not even spring training provided the Mets refuge from boos from their fans. Forty-nine years ago, with players vastly less talented than Oliver Perez and Luis Castillo, the Mets drew more laughter than jeers.

"The fans didn't really care what happened," said longtime Mets broadcaster Ralph Kiner, who called all 120 losses on television. "It was just the fact that National League baseball was back in New York.''

Former pitcher Roger Craig, who lost 24 games that season, recalled how fans would gather on the street outside the Mets' clubhouse after games. When the Mets won, they would chant the names of the stars of the game.

"They wanted us to come out and take a bow," Craig said. "It happened very seldom, but we always did it."

Other teams have come close to duplicating what the '62 Mets did. The 2003 Detroit Tigers lost 119 games. And someday, another team will challenge the record again. The phone calls will come again. Jackson's response will remain the same.

"I don't wish for anybody else to break that record," he said. "No, I don't wish that on anybody."