Trailing well-earned plaudits, Larry Keigwin, who turns 39 on Friday, brought his 8-year-old dance group, Keigwin + Company, to the Joyce Theater on Tuesday for the world-premiere run (through Sunday) of "EXIT," his hourlong creation that has been a year in the making. A one-time backup dancer on "Club MTV" as well as a stage dancer of remarkable theatrical finesse and prowess, Mr. Keigwin has made his name as a choreographer whose often terse and sassy dances engaged audiences with their quick wit and rich inventiveness.

 The Joyce Theater  175 Eighth Ave., (212) 242-0800  Through Sunday

He could take a mattress in "Mattress Suite" (2003), cardboard coffee cups in "Caffeinated" (2007), and bath towels and bottled water, among other props, in "Elements" (2008) and turn everyday tasks using commonplace objects into vivid and beguiling dance theater. Last September he staged "Fashion's Night Out: The Show," a kick-off for New York's Fashion Week involving over 150 of the industry's top models.

For "EXIT," the press release notes that the work took inspiration from "the worlds of fashion and drama." But while some fashion, of the club-kid variety, is evident in the often skin-baring, primarily black outfits designed by Karen Young and Jeff Poulin, drama is disappointingly absent. I didn't see Mr. Keigwin's September event, and so don't know how effective the strutting models managed to be. But with rare and brief exceptions, the seven hardworking dancers in the choreographer's own company manage to make little individually of their attitude-heavy moves in "EXIT."

The setting for "EXIT," by Dane Laffrey, has a slate-gray hue and looks like a slick back room in a club where the only way out is a single emergency door. Burke Wilmore's varied side, front and top lighting supports the darkened ambience, picking out, amid the shadows, the activities of the four men and three women who are its denizens.

The work's score, composed by electro-acoustic cellist Christopher Lancaster and pianist Jerome Begin, with Mr. Begin on hand as spontaneous editor and performer, gives "EXIT" a disco pulse and changeable accompaniment of some variety and texture. Though off to the side, Mr. Begin becomes the most identifiable and individual of all the performers involved in "EXIT," which, until two weeks ago, was called "Dark Habits."

Early on, something of an exit theme surfaces when the seventh dancer, Ryoji Sasamoto, joins the sextet that initially dominates the scene. Mr. Sasamoto appears and, eventually, disappears behind the setting's stark back wall, which reveals itself to be freestanding and not stage-wide.

The actions and interactions of all the dancers, even the seemingly separate Mr. Sasamoto, veer from revealing club-dance bravado to indicating vulnerabilities. At about the midpoint of "EXIT," a mood-changing "slow dance" for Gary Schaufeld and Matthew Baker—to an uncredited sampling of "I've Gotta Be Me"—shifts the vaguely orgiastic nature of the dancing into something more intimate. But not for long. Accompanied by louder portions of the song's title phrase, a bright-faced Aaron Carr bursts into this scene in high-heeled pumps, wearing a see-through top over his black jock strap. This is not, alas, one of Mr. Keigwin's trademark strokes of witty or piquant theater. Instead of seeming fresh, it has an air of common campiness.

Besides the momentary individuality of Mr. Sasamoto and of a scene where Mr. Schaufeld appears to strangle Mr. Baker, one dancer in this shadowed world could be any other.

Otherwise lifting the somewhat monotonously dark tussles and gyrations out of their rut is a brisk passage for all seven dancers striding vividly around in white high heels lit bright by black light. The glowing effect, more decorative than dramatic, manages, as does a sudden burst of confetti and streamers, to break through the dance's wallpaper sameness.

What's surprising about this work from an often distinctive dancemaker is its absence of any real character or characters. "EXIT" makes for a dull departure.