 The Oak Room (the Algonquin Hotel)  59 W. 44th St.  (212) 840-6800, through April 2 

Singer Jessica Molaskey and pianist-songwriter Dave Frishberg begin their two-person act by pondering the question of "Who's on First?" But as they well know, it doesn't matter which of the two starts out or even gets top billing, since the center attraction is Mr. Frishberg's wonderful songs themselves. His classics are still as funny ("My Attorney Bernie") and as touching ("You Are There") as ever. "I'm Hip" has been slightly updated—now the familiar name-dropping line is "Jamie Cullum knows my friend"—and it digresses into a Jerome Kern rewrite called "I Won't Scat," but the famous quote from Charlie Parker's "Bird of Paradise" is still in place. Ms. Molaskey remains a wonderful foil and sparring partner, equal parts Eydie Gormé and Anne Meara.

 Feinstein's at Loews Regency  540 Park Ave.  (212) 339-4095, Tuesday-Saturday, March 29-April 2 



 Feinstein's at Loews Regency  540 Park Ave.  (212) 339-4095, Monday 

Feinstein's offers an abundance of musical riches, with an appealingly wide generational span. The featured attraction is the delightful Nellie McKay: eclectic, irreverent, funny, sad, poignant, silly, often all at once, whether she is re-tooling a standard or offering one of her originals (which are also heard on a special weekend late show). On Monday, the main event is, quite possibly, the last major active female vocalist of the swing era. Jane Harvey headlined at Café Society and with the big bands of Benny Goodman and Desi Arnaz. Later, she recorded a short but choice series of albums that culminated in what is still the best overall jazz vocal take on the songs of Stephen Sondheim. Ms. Harvey, whose New York appearances are far too infrequent, is such a vital performer that when she sings "I'm Still Here" (lately an overdone anthem for veteran divas), it almost seems redundant.

 Village Vanguard  178 Seventh Avenue South  (212) 255-4037, through Sunday  

In discussing the music of trumpeter-composer-ideologue Dave Douglas, one might as well be talking about at least a half-dozen different guys. Even more than most creative contemporary jazzmen (Joe Lovano and John Zorn spring to mind), Mr. Douglas doesn't so much create concept albums as concept bands, all of which operate roughly simultaneously and express different aspects of his personal vision. Inspired by the late Lester Bowie's Brass Fantasy, Brass Ecstasy shows that there is amazing sonic richness and variety even in a band without reeds, keys or strings. The quintet consists of Vincent Chancey (French horn), Luis Bonilla (trombone), Marcus Rojas (tuba) and Rudy Royston (drums), in addition to the leader's trumpet. Of all Mr. Douglas's bands, this one makes the most extensive use of prewritten music and is, quite possibly, his most user-friendly group. His re-arrangement of Otis Redding's "Mr. Pitiful" drew the biggest applause on opening night.

 The Blue Note   131 W. Third St.  (212) 475-8592, through Sunday 



 Brooklyn Conservatory of Music  58 Seventh Ave., Brooklyn  (718) 622-3300, Saturday 

If Dave Douglas's Brass Ecstasy whets your appetite for "special-interest groups" full of unexpected combinations of instruments and sounds, here are two shows well worth considering. Philadelphian Odean Pope's "choir" of nine saxophones is something to see as well as hear; at full throttle, they almost seem more like a saxophone militia—small wonder that their most recent album was titled "Locked and Loaded." They are especially lethal with that most aggressive of jazz sharpshooters, James Carter, taking the featured role. Howard Johnson, playing in Brooklyn, specializes in many flavors of deep register instruments, including the low "A" baritone sax and the tuba, both of which he has played in a wide variety of contexts. His versatile ensemble, Gravity, has pretty much cornered the market on all-tuba jazz bands; if you don't feel like taking the B train out to Brooklyn, you'll just have to go and hear some other all-tuba band somewhere.

 Birdland  315 W. 44th St.  (212) 581-3080, Saturday 

To really learn to appreciate something—anything—try going without it for a while. Bassist Charlie Haden spent the early part of his career as a free-jazz firebrand, playing everything but conventional melody and harmony. But as a bandleader, his most distinguished ensemble has been Quartet West, formed 25 years ago with pianist Alan Broadbent and tenor saxophonist Ernie Watts. If any contemporary jazz group shows an understanding of old-fashioned melody and romance (which isn't the same as sentiment) it's Quartet West, which celebrates the glorious grit of hard-boiled Los Angeles in the Raymond Chandler era. Mr. Haden's latest album, "Sophisticated Ladies," adds five first-class female singers and a string orchestra to the Quartet, and if the music is beautiful it's because he knows better than anyone how not to take a great song for granted.

The new album represents the latest phase in Mr. Haden's relationship to the classic songbook: For his 1991 album "Haunted Heart," he "sampled" in actual recorded vocals by iconic artists such as Jo Stafford and Billie Holiday. In "The Art of Song" (1999), he recorded two exceptional, living veteran vocalists, Shirley Horn and Bill Henderson, with the Quartet. Now he takes the latest step by recruiting five excellent contemporary singers as the Sophisticated Ladies of the album's title.

It's also a fascinating combination of mostly well-known vocalists, nearly all of whom turn in the best work of their respective careers here, and some excellent songs so rare that it obviously took a musical Philip Marlowe to uncover them. The two most compelling tracks are rare lyrics to unlikely movie themes, Cassandra Wilson singing "My Love and I" (from "Apache," Mercer & Raksin) and soprano Renee Fleming doing her most successful vocal yet on a pop song, "A Love Like This" (from "For Whom the Bell Tolls," Washington & Young). Otherwise, Ruth Cameron (Mrs. Charlie Haden) totally aces the Lee Wiley-associated torch tune "Let's Call It a Day," and Diana Krall is the only voice I can imagine singing the Benny Goodman theme "Goodbye." Alan Broadbent's string orchestrations for these feminine forms are so tangible that they're literally sonic fabric; he's as much Edith Head as he is Miklos Rosza.

The first two nights of the Birdland run suffered from Mr. Haden's absence—the 73-year-old was having a health issue and announced plans to join the run on Thursday. His replacement, Scott Colley, is an accomplished bassist, but no one could have the same chemistry that Mr. Haden has with his own band, particularly Mr. Watts. The two are normally like the heroes of a buddy action movie, or, like Burt Lancaster and Tony Curtis in "Sweet Smell of Success," the understated cool of one balancing the high drama of the other. The group showed its appreciation of Mr. Haden by playing his tunes, which unrolled like scenes in a classic film: The bright and optimistic "Hello My Lovely" could have underscored a scene of boy-meets-girl; the romping calypso "Child's Play" belonged under a dance sequence; and the excruciatingly haunting ballad "First Song" clearly represented a moment of heartbreak.

Quartet West has a synergy few bands out there can match, and will sound even better when Mr. Haden takes his place this weekend. Unlike most movies, his message is abundantly clear: Melody, like love, is to be enjoyed whenever we can get it. We'll all be sleeping the Big Sleep soon enough. Here's looking at you, kid.