For Glencore International, it is time for Plan C.  Xstrata put the kibosh on Plan A when it refused to consider a merger with the commodities-trading giant that would have enabled Glencore partners to realize the full value of their 34.5% stake in the miner. 

Investors now have ruined Plan B by refusing to accept Glencore's ambitious $60 billion-plus valuation target, which might have allowed a quick post-IPO merger. Glencore has been forced to lower its target and must prepare for a long spell in the public markets. 

Glencore's partners might wish they could simply scrap the IPO and try to re-engage mining giant Xstrata in merger talks. After all, going down the IPO route has already forced them to accept substantial dilution, even greater following the price cut. A series of self-inflicted public-relations gaffes will have confirmed their worst fears about exposing this traditionally secretive business to public scrutiny. But there is no certainty Xstrata boss  Mick Davis would agree to a deal even at a much lower value—or that he could win the support of his shareholders, who remain suspicious of the benefits of integrating Glencore's trading business with Xstrata's mining assets. 

So Glencore boss  Ivan Glasenberg has little option but to plow on with the IPO. The snag is that, even at the midpoint of the new price range, Glencore's valuation looks punchy. Although Mr. Glasenberg has secured $3.1 billion of support from cornerstone investors and the deal has been cleverly constructed to maximize investment from passive index-tracking funds, he still needs to find as much as $6 billion from active investors. That is tough in today's markets. 

At $53 billion, Glencore would be valued at 8.8 times Citi's forecast of 2011 earnings of $6 billion, itself a record. That would put it in line with Xstrata's 8.9 times, but ahead of  Rio Tinto's
RIO


-0.37
%




 7.4 times. 

While its mining assets have strong production-growth profiles, they are often located in politically difficult areas. Glencore's marketing arm is supposed to cushion commodities-price fluctuations, but its earnings fell as hard as those of its industrial arm in the tough year of 2009. Glencore's return on equity averaged 12.5% in the last three years, above Xstrata's 10%, but below Rio's 21.4% and BHP Billiton's 30.1%. 

Glencore's advisers insist Mr. Glasenberg realizes the need for a realistic price that will allow it to trade healthily in the aftermarket. That would help rebuild investor confidence after the poor start to the IPO. So Glencore's final IPO price will need to offer investors a generous discount. Mr. Glasenberg should brace himself for a price at the bottom of the range. 

—Andrew Peaple  and Simon Nixon