Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke appears to have support from other Fed officials to continue his $600 billion bond-buying program when they convene for their next policy meeting on January 26-27.

Charles Plosser, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, was the latest to signal a desire for continuity from the Fed, even though he is highly skeptical of the program's effectiveness. "I wish we hadn't done it, but that doesn't mean I want to stop it right now," Mr. Plosser said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal.

Mr. Plosser is among four regional Fed bank presidents who become voting members of the policy-making Federal Open Market Committee this year. The others are Charles Evans of Chicago, Richard Fisher of Dallas and Narayana Kocherlakota of Minneapolis.

The FOMC consists of 12 regional Fed bank presidents plus the members of the Fed board in Washington, now numbering six with one seat unfilled. Five Fed bank presidents vote at meetings: the New York Fed president and four others serve an annual rotation. All participate in deliberations; only voters can formally dissent.

Though Mr. Bernanke drives Fed decisions, significant dissent would complicate his efforts to continue the program or ramp it up if needed. So far none of the new voting members are voicing a strong inclination to change course— including Mr. Plosser and Mr. Fisher, both of whom have been outspoken critics of the policy. Both are sure to oppose any expansion, though.

When asked if he wanted to halt the Fed's $600 billion bond-buying program, launched in November, Mr. Plosser said he was reluctant to alter Fed policy now. "Stop and go policies can be disruptive," he said. Doing so could confuse the public about the Fed's strategy. Still, Mr. Plosser isn't a big fan of the policy, known as "quantitative easing," or QE2, because it's the second round of such bond-buying. The economy would have to get much weaker and inflation would need to fall much further for him to consider supporting any additional Fed bond buying, he said.

In a separate interview with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Fisher said, "I would not have voted for QE2 had I been a voting member" last year.

He believes businesses are flush with cash and not in need of the easier borrowing conditions that the Fed is trying to engineer. "I do not believe we got a whole lot out of this." Still, he added, he expected the program to be carried through to its planned end in June. "I am not itching to be a dissenter," he said.

Mr. Evans has supported Fed bond-buying all along. Mr. Kocherlakota said in an earlier interview that while he was skeptical about its benefits, he was a supporter. All six Fed governors favored the launch of QE2, although one—Kevin Warsh—criticized it almost immediately. 

The Fed's bond-buying is meant to hold down long-term interest rates, pushing investors into riskier assets like stocks and corporate bonds and easing financial conditions broadly at a time when the Fed already has lowered short-term interest rates to zero. 

 Write to  Jon Hilsenrath at jon.hilsenrath@wsj.com 