The Corinthia Hotel London, with soaring lobbies, marble bathrooms, and views of Trafalgar Square, is one of the year's most-anticipated new luxury hotels. It hosted Colin Firth, Amy Adams and other movie stars last month at a lunch honoring nominees for the U.K.'s top film awards. Its largest owner is Libya's sovereign-wealth fund, the Libyan Investment Authority.

Middle Eastern oil wealth is no stranger to funding splashy deals, but Libya has only recently emerged as a significant player in global markets. With the government of Col. Moammar Gadhafi in turmoil, the country's assets in banks, funds and real estate have counterparties around the world scrambling to grasp the implications of asset freezes and sanctions.

The 294-room Corinthia, where construction is nearly complete, is expected to open on schedule next month, and the project hasn't been affected by the U.K.'s freeze on assets owned or controlled by Col. Gadhafi and his family, a person close to the project said.

In the U.S., banks such as  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.94
%




 that do business with the Libyan government are required to freeze assets and block any new transactions. Banks have to sit on these funds until the U.S. Treasury lifts the blockade. They don't have to liquidate their holdings.

Most assets subject to the $30 billion blockade consist of cash and securities, said a person familiar with the situation. Once the securities mature, they will be converted to cash, this person said.

U.S. banks with outstanding loans to Libya can continue to collect payments, but otherwise have to block debt payments upon receipt and put them into an interest-bearing account set at market rates, said people familiar with the situation. The banks then can apply to the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control for a license to unblock the transaction and get paid.

Some LIA holdings

Many of Libya's real-estate holdings are in London, where the Libyan Investment Authority opened an office a couple of years ago. The authority bought a large office building in the financial district for about $200 million in December 2008. The following year, it bought a retail and office investment complex on Oxford Street, London's main shopping boulevard, for about $250 million. Last year, it paid about $10 million for the leasehold of a building in tony Mayfair, where many hedge-fund managers and financiers have offices.

"They bought quality buildings for long-term hold for the people of Libya," said  Harvey Soning, chairman of real-estate brokerage James Andrew International, who says he has advised the sovereign fund on its real-estate deals in the U.K. for 15 years. "I've always found them to be charming and highly educated individuals."

On Sunday, the U.K. said it was freezing assets owned or controlled by Col. Gadhafi and his family. The broadly worded statement said the freeze included anyone acting on their behalf or by entities controlled by them. The move means that any assets owned in the U.K. can't be sold or transferred while the freeze remains in place.

Libya also holds stakes in a number of large European companies, including U.K.-based publisher  Pearson PLC and a wide range of Italian companies from soccer club Juventus to defense contractor  Finmeccanica
FNC


3.16
%




 SpA. The LIA is the top shareholder in Italy's biggest bank,  UniCredit
UNCFF


-1.02
%




 SpA, and an investor in a private-equity fund run by Carlyle Group, of Washington.

One of Libya's longest-running ventures has been in hotels in Europe and Africa. Its state investment arm bought a stake in Malta hotelier Corinthia Palace Hotel Company Ltd., in 1974. In 2000 that company created a publicly traded subsidiary, International Hotel Investments PLC, which owns luxury hotels from Tripoli to St. Petersburg, Russia, and posted revenue of €45 million in the first six months of last year. In London, IHI in 2008 bought the Metropole Building, on the edge of the River Thames, and later secured a $220 million loan from a syndicate of banks led and arranged by  Barclays
BCS


0.90
%




 PLC to convert the property to a luxury hotel. Libyan Investment Authority has a 50% equity stake in the project as well as 35% ownership of IHI, according to a spokesman for IHI.

 Write to  Anton Troianovski at anton.troianovski@wsj.com, Dan Fitzpatrick at dan.fitzpatrick@wsj.com and Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com 