TUCSON, Ariz.—A federal grand jury indicted Jared Lee Loughner Wednesday, charging him with attempting to assassinate Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and to murder two of her aides. 

Prosecutors indicated that other charges were likely to follow soon involving the killing of two federal officials, Judge John Roll and Giffords aide Gabriel Zimmerman.

Meanwhile, Ms. Giffords's office said Wednesday that the congresswoman was expected to leave Tucson's University Medical Center and move to a Houston rehabilitation center as early as Friday.

Ms. Giffords was recovering from a bullet wound to her brain after being shot at close range Jan. 8 at an event she was holding at a Safeway supermarket. Six people died and 13 were wounded in the attack, including the 40-year-old congresswoman. 

Mr. Loughner, who was taken into custody at the scene of the shooting, was previously charged in a five-count criminal complaint that alleged he murdered the two federal officials. 

In cases where a criminal complaint is initially filed, that action is commonly followed by an indictment where prosecutors present evidence to a grand jury, which decides whether there is enough evidence to proceed.

Dennis Burke, the U.S. attorney in Arizona, noted that since the case also involves potential death-penalty charges, Justice Department rules "require us to pursue a deliberate and thorough process. Today's charges are just the beginning of our legal action." 

Authorities believe Ms. Giffords was the main target of the attack. The penalty for attempting to assassinate a member of Congress is up to life imprisonment. The attempted murder counts carry up to 20-year penalties. 

Mr. Loughner, who remains in custody in a federal facility near Phoenix, hasn't yet entered a plea. An attorney for him declined to comment on the indictment. 

Since the shooting, Ms. Giffords has made steady progress, though she remains in serious condition. She can open her eyes and appears to have some vision in at least one eye. She has smiled at her husband and rubbed his neck, doctors said. A hospital spokeswoman, Janet Stark, said Ms. Giffords was able to stand with assistance Wednesday and looked out a window of her room.

Ms. Giffords was scheduled to be transported to Memorial Hermann, a trauma center in Houston on Friday, hospital officials there said. 

Ms. Giffords will be evaluated at the trauma center, then moved to Memorial Herman's rehabilitation center nearby, officials at the Houston center said. 

"Because this is a fluid situation, the exact day of the move will depend on the congresswoman's health," a statement from Ms. Giffords's office said. 

Mark Kelly, the congresswoman's husband, said in the statement: "I am extremely hopeful at the signs of recovery that my wife has made since the shooting. The team of doctors and nurses at UMC has stabilized her to the point of being ready to move to the rehabilitation phase." 

Surveillance video taken from the Safeway shows a gunman shooting someone, apparently Ms. Giffords, at close range, said Chris Nanos, a captain with the Pima County Sheriff, who viewed the footage. 

Ms. Giffords is off-camera, with just a wisp of her hair visible, Mr. Nanos said. 

The shooter is clearly visible raising his gun without hesitation, Mr. Nanos said. 

The gunman then turns to the crowd around Ms. Giffords and shoots "indiscriminately," he said. 

 Write to  John R. Emshwiller at john.emshwiller@wsj.com and Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 