Want to get a piece of Facebook Inc. or Twitter Inc. or some other hot private company? You may already have.

Read the complete Investing in Funds report. 

A number of mutual funds are quietly holding shares of private companies, including stakes in those two technology phenoms.

Analysts say investments in private firms can pay off big if the fledgling companies go public or are bought. But they also warn that funds can run into valuation and liquidity problems when investing in start-ups.

Investors are mostly likely to find these kinds of investments in mutual funds that specialize in small-cap or midcap stocks, growth stocks, or the technology or communications sectors. It usually won't be obvious that the fund owns shares of private companies—investors likely will have to scour the fund's filings to figure it out. 

The investments also are likely to be tiny: Facebook shares, for instance, make up a small percentage of the  Morgan Stanley
MS


-0.37
%




 Investment Management and  T. Rowe Price Group Inc.
TROW


-0.12
%




 mutual funds that hold them.

Still, these investments can add a bit of diversity to a mutual fund, says  Todd Rosenbluth, a mutual-fund analyst with Standard & Poor's Equity Research. They give "retail investors the chance to be exposed to newer growth companies and not just the more established tech stalwarts that you typically see in a mutual fund," he says.

Private companies have become more appealing as the initial-public-offering, or IPO, market has cooled. "Internet companies that don't need capital are choosing to stay private longer," says  Rob Bartolo, who manages  T. Rowe Price Growth Stock, which acquired shares of Facebook, coupon company Groupon Inc. and online-game creator Zynga Inc. earlier this year. "For me, there are a bunch of benefits. No. 1: You can actually invest in these companies when they have smaller market caps."

If a fund has a stake in a private firm that does eventually go public or gets acquired, the fund likely will enjoy big returns, says Mr. Rosenbluth. 

  Kevin Landis, chief investment officer at Firsthand Funds, says the value of two private tech firms owned by Firsthand Technology Value, Radia Communications and Global Locate, doubled by the time the firms were purchased by public companies in 2003 and 2007, respectively. 

Having access to a private firm's financials offers another advantage: It can give a fund an edge when evaluating its other investments. "If you own Google or Microsoft or other competitors in the space, you'd certainly want to know what's going on with a market-niche dominator like Facebook," says  Russel Kinnel, director of mutual-fund research at  Morningstar Inc.
MORN


-0.43
%




 

But holding shares of private companies can be risky for open-end mutual funds—especially if those shares make up a big chunk of the fund, analysts say. Since the shares don't trade on a public exchange, they can be difficult to sell, and calculating their proper value is often more of an art than a science. There may even be restrictions on when and to whom the fund can sell the stock; for example, the fund may not be able to sell for a period of time after an IPO. Because of these risks, the Securities and Exchange Commission mandates that shares of private companies make up no more than 15% of an open-end mutual fund at the time of purchase. 

If the value of the private equities rises, the value of the publicly traded equities falls, or the mutual fund has to sell publicly traded stocks to pay investors leaving the fund, the portion of the fund taken up by private stocks can easily exceed the SEC's 15% limit. 

The SEC limit should be more like 5% or 10%, Morningstar's Mr. Kinnel says, because coming up with a daily net asset value for the fund that includes proper valuations of all securities "gets awfully messy" when shares of private companies make up a significant portion of the fund. Funds can price these shares based on what they paid or on a valuation implied by the most recent round of private-equity funding. But they also can get more creative with valuations, Mr. Kinnel says, pegging their pricing to a multiple of revenue or a relevant stock index. 

There's also the risk that the start-up will stop growing and won't stage an IPO, leaving the fund with the responsibility of lowering the valuation of the shares. If something happens that could affect the private company's outlook, Mr. Landis says, the fund board needs to be ready to meet and discuss on a moment's notice: "The minute there's news, you better reprice." 

Valuation and liquidity problems, paired with the pressure of the SEC's limit, have caused problems for funds in the past. 

Shares of private companies ballooned to 26.8% of assets at Firsthand Technology Value at the end of 2009; a Morningstar analyst warned investors away from the fund in August of that year, saying it was too risky.

Firsthand Funds says that by the end of 2010, private-equity shares had dropped back under the 15% limit as public stocks recovered from the depths of the recession and valuations of private companies held by the fund fell. Mr. Landis says the biggest issue when the fund was over the SEC limit was that it wasn't able to invest in any other private companies.

Firsthand Funds in April reorganized Technology Value into a type of closed-end fund, which has no limit on investments in private companies. "We want the ability to go out there and make the most attractive investments we can," says Mr. Landis, "and for us we see them as companies that are not public." 

In 1998, some shareholders in the IAI Value fund filed suit, alleging they had been hurt when the fund's manager mispriced the fund's stake in Pathnet, a private telecom company that filed to go public and then later withdrew the offering. IAI eventually paid them a court-ordered settlement of $500,000, according to  Jeff Lewin, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, and the IAI fund business was sold to Federated Investors in 2000.

In 2004, meanwhile, the SEC alleged that Van Wagoner Capital Management Inc. had deliberately undervalued its funds' private holdings in an effort to stay under the 15% limit. The firm settled without admitting or denying wrongdoing. The funds are now managed by Tanaka Capital Management, which says they no longer invest in private companies.

Mr. Kinnel says mutual-fund managers would be wise to keep their holdings of private securities small. "Mutual funds are designed to have daily liquidity and a daily price," he says. "There are other vehicles that are better designed for securities that don't trade."

 Ms. Ensign is a staff reporter for The Wall Street Journal in New York. Email her at rachel.ensign@wsj.com. 