Any band that survives past the quarter-century mark will struggle to keep things fresh. For Yo La Tengo, which formed in Hoboken, N.J., in 1984, the solution involves playing only songs whose titles contain proper names, or performing a cold reading of "Seinfeld," with singer/guitarist Ira Kaplan in the role of Jerry.

The core of the band—Mr. Kaplan and his drummer wife Georgia Hubley—has been together since the outset, and the lineup hasn't changed since the addition of bassist James McNew in 1992. Stability and longevity have forced Yo La Tengo to seek novel ways to entertain themselves while still engaging one of the most loyal fan bases in rock. 

For its current American tour, the band has embraced the indie-rock equivalent of "Wheel of Fortune," a large multicolored disc divided into several categories—including songs beginning with the letter "S" and the performance of an entire instrumental film score written by the band in 2002. A spin of the wheel by a guest lands on an imperative that sets the performance for the first set. 

The wheel will be with the trio on Tuesday when they begin a two-night stint at the Bell House in Brooklyn.

"The less information we give people about what's going to happen, the better," Mr. Kaplan, 54 years old, said recently.

The concept revitalizes Yo La Tengo's back catalog in a way that keeps the band at a safe distance from the standard maneuvers of the industry's current nostalgia boom—like playing an entire album front to back. But it's also a lot of work.

"It calls upon us to be familiar with a lot of songs that, until we did it, we weren't familiar with at all," Mr. Kaplan said. "A couple of songs we'd never played [live] before—some songs we'd never played in years."

For Mr. Kaplan, the notion of touring behind one of the group's classic albums, like 1997's "I Can Hear the Heart Beating as One" and 2000's "And Then Nothing Turned Itself Inside-Out," holds little interest. "That was one of the things," he said. "Do we put records on [the wheel]? But we didn't want to."

Each night, the second set features a lineup of the band's choosing, a quality safeguard for the crowd in case the wheel stopped earlier on one of the more esoteric options, such as "Sitcom Theater," which requires the band's members to act out an episode of a sitcom.

Mr. Kaplan claims this presents "a funnier side of what we do" to an audience—but it doesn't always go over well. When Yo La Tengo was forced to re-enact the "Chinese Restaurant" episode of "Seinfeld" during a show in Chicago earlier this year, the results sparked mixed reactions and hearty booing.

"I like the idea that it will create some amount of chaos. That's attractive to me as a fan," said Jesse Jarnow, a writer at work on a Yo La Tengo biography called "Big Day Coming." "Think about how polite the average indie-rock crowd is and what it would take to get them to boo Yo La Tengo."

Mr. Kaplan and company seem to thrive on that unpredictability. At their annual eight-night set of Hanukkah shows at the venerable Hoboken club Maxwell's, they cover an astonishing amount of musical ground. They also appear regularly in fund-raising marathons for the Jersey City-based nonprofit radio station WFMU, playing song requests called in by listeners interested in pledging funds.

"Through the years things would get stale or dull just doing the greatest hits, especially when you have 25 to 30 years of songs," said WFMU DJ Gaylord Fields, the host of the fund-raising shows and a former roommate of Mr. Kaplan and Ms. Hubley. "There's no way to please yourself and your bandmates. So the wheel is a way to let fate decide what any given set will be."

For this week's Brooklyn shows, Mr. Kaplan has been toying with fate again. "We've added another slot on the wheel, so there's a few new songs we have to remember," he said. "We're going to do 'I'd Like to Buy a Vowel,' in honor of 'Wheel of Fortune'—songs that begin with vowels in our repertoire. We like the idea of finding a context in which some of the old songs, which didn't really seem to fit before, now they do fit."