KABUL—A spate of insurgent attacks in the past month, including Wednesday's bombing that killed at least two people, have shattered the relative calm that Afghanistan's capital had seen since the summer.

Early last year, the Taliban and the affiliated Haqqani network launched spectacular attacks on government buildings, hotels and guest houses inhabited by foreigners in Kabul.

Since then, however, the U.S.-led coalition and Afghan forces had been cracking down on Kabul-based insurgent cells. No serious attack occurred in the city for months—until the latest spate started in late December.

Coalition officials stress that Kabul is still secure, and that insurgent activity in the capital remains minor when compared with rural areas in much of the country, and in cities such as Kandahar or Ghazni.

In recent months, the Afghan government has forced international organizations, embassies and Western contractors to tear down many of the concrete blast walls that had mushroomed across the city, saying the fortifications disrupted civilian traffic and are unnecessary because Kabul has become safe.

That is a perception that the Taliban is determined to challenge. "We are paying more attention to Kabul," Zabiullah Mujahid, a spokesman for the Taliban, said Wednesday. "Kabul is most important for us as it's the heart of the government and foreign troops. We can easily hit our targets in Kabul."

The recent pickup in Taliban activity in the capital started soon after Haji Lala, a former bodyguard of the Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar, was appointed as the insurgent group's shadow governor for Kabul late last year, Western officials say. The Taliban spokesman, Mr. Mujahid, said another insurgent commander oversees Kabul.

Haji Lala could have more leeway in getting various insurgent groups to cooperate in attacks within Kabul, a coalition intelligence official explained. "They can say, Hey, he's Mullah Omar's bodyguard, he's his boy... and you need to start listening to him," the intelligence official said.

The Taliban have also changed their tactics in Kabul, moving away from attacks on coalition forces and foreigners, and hitting "softer" Afghan security and government targets instead, the intelligence official said.

Kabul is the only part of the country where Afghan forces have taken over security responsibilities from the coalition. The Taliban's stepped-up attacks here underscore the fragile nature of the coalition's plans to start handing over other areas to Afghan troops. Afghan forces are supposed to assume control of the entire country by the end of 2014, allowing the bulk of the U.S.-led coalition troops to return home.

The latest Taliban attack in Kabul, on Wednesday, killed at least two and wounded about 30 when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives next to a minibus transporting employees of the National Directorate of Security, Afghanistan's intelligence agency.

"I saw dozens of bodies on the ground after the explosion and everybody was crying and shouting," said Hakim Khan, a 40-year-old owner of a shop near the explosion site, in the city's Alawuddin square.

Mr. Khan, who helped move the wounded into an ambulance, said many were badly mangled and charred by the blast.

The recent surge in attacks began Dec. 19, when insurgents ambushed an Afghan army truck in the city, killing five soldiers and wounding scores more. Last week, a bomb in central Kabul killed a policeman and wounded bystanders.

NDS, the intelligence agency, says it thwarted in recent weeks a bombing at the presidential palace and an assassination attempt on the country's first vice president.

At a United Nations meeting in Kabul four weeks ago, the organization's security officials asked U.N. employees to be more vigilant in Kabul because of Haji Lala's appointment as shadow governor, according to staffers present there.

Kieran Dwyer, chief spokesman for the U.N.'s mission in Afghanistan, declined to discuss that meeting. But, he said, the U.N.'s "general concern is that insurgents are trying to have a more spectacular impact"—by launching urban attacks of the kind that occurred Wednesday.

Elsewhere in Afghanistan on Wednesday, NATO said four of its troops were killed in eastern Afghanistan, three of them by a roadside bomb and one in an insurgent attack. Another was killed by a bomb in the south, the alliance said, bringing the total number of international forces killed so far this year to 16.

—Habib Totakhil contributed to this article.

