RIO DE JANEIRO—As the first reports of airstrikes over Libya came in this weekend, President Barack Obama was in Brazil, talking to his counterpart about trade policy and biofuels.

A few minutes later, the president was giving final orders for the U.S. to join the military strike.

For the White House, it was a surreal situation: As the U.S. launched a military campaign halfway around the world, the president began a five-day tour of Latin America that had little to do with the matter at hand.

While Mr. Obama got regular briefings on the Libya airstrikes, he stuck doggedly to his schedule. On Sunday, the president reached out to ordinary Brazilians, kicking around a soccer ball with kids in a rehabilitated slum called Cidade de Deus, once featured in an Oscar-winning film documenting violence in Brazil's vast underclass. In a later speech, he drew comparisons between Latin America's turn to democracy in recent decades and the new push for democracy in the Middle East. 

Residents of the slum, many of them black, erupted in cheers at his the arrival of his motorcade. Mothers and barefoot children crowded along barricades for a glimpse. One woman holding two children wept. 

Many here commented about how Mr. Obama looked like them. Capturing the feeling, a local Obama lookalike dressed up in a presidential suit with two friends as faux security guards paraded to applause of onlookers.

"For a black man to be president of the U.S. is amazing," said Enio de Melo, a 42-year-old bar owner, who is black and laments and lamented that Brazil hasn't yet produced its own black president. "For that president to come here is amazing for us, too."

White House officials say they never considered canceling the trip, which had been in the works since last year, despite repeated questions about Mr. Obama's plans in the face of twin crises in Libya and Japan. 

"Obviously, there is a lot going on around the world and much that demands our urgent attention," Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Friday in previewing the Latin America trip. "But as I often say, we have to deal with both the urgent and the important at the same time."

The White House did cancel foreign trips twice last year, both due to domestic matters—first to push through final passage of his health-care plan and later due to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill. This time, concern that Mr. Obama could get a reputation abroad as unreliable may have played a part in the White House determination to press ahead. 

"Calling off the trip would have contributed to the already widespread view in the region that for the U.S., Latin America is unimportant, and all other parts of the world take precedence," said Michael Shifter, president of the Inter-American Dialogue, a think tank in Washington.

Beyond that, the trip serves the White House's domestic political agenda. White House officials have pushed hard the message that Mr. Obama came to Brazil to focus on American exports, which lead to American jobs – voters' top priority.

The trip also underscores a conviction that long-term economic interests are now in play in a region where Brazil now has the world's seventh biggest economy and is an increasingly important voice in key economic matters like international currency wars. 

After visiting the slum on Sunday, Mr. Obama delivered a speech in which he celebrated the political and economic rise of Brazil, and connected the struggle for human rights here with that in the Middle East. He made passing reference to Libya, but did not mention the military strikes—which Brazil declined to support in the United Nations Security Council last week.

"We've seen the people of Libya take a courageous stand against a regime determined to brutalize its own citizens," he said. "As two nations who have struggled over many generations to perfect our own democracies, the United States and Brazil know that the future of the Arab World will be determined by its people."

Outside the theater, throngs gathered around television screens in bars and cafes broadcasting the speech in surrounding streets, and listeners in the theater cheered Mr. Obama's historic comparisons of the U.S. and Brazil.

A speech on Monday in Santiago, Chile, is expected to hit similar themes—comparing the rise of democracy across Latin America to the struggle ongoing today in the Arab world. He concludes his trip with a stop in El Salvador, returning to Washington on Wednesday.