The Arab League on Saturday called on the United Nations Security Council to enforce a "no-fly zone" over Libyan airspace, marking a decisive diplomatic victory for rebel forces opposed to Moammar Gadhafi, the Libyan ruler.

The announcement will bolster calls by some European leaders to intervene in the violent confrontation between rebels and Col. Gadhafi's military.

The U.S. and the European Union had deferred to the 22-member league of Arab nations to determine whether outside military forces should intervene. 

The air superiority of forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi has helped tip the balance of power against the antigovernment uprising based in the eastern part of the country. On Saturday, government forces tightened their grip on the coastal road linking government-held territory to the rebel-controlled east, the Associated Press reported.

Col. Gadhafi's forces all but routed rebels in the coastal oil-refining city of Ras Lanuf earlier this week and completed their assault on Zawiya, a rebel stronghold west of Tripoli, Libya's capital.

Deliberations will now go to the U.N. Security Council, where permanent members China and Russia are thought to oppose the proposed no-fly zone.

Abdel Hafeez Goga, the deputy head of the Benghazi-based provisional rebel government, the Transitional National Council, praised the Arab League decision.

"We welcome and salute their decision and look at it as a step forward to the imposition of no-fly-zone imposition," he told a news conference in Benghazi. 

A no-fly zone would ground Libya's air forces, but the practical considerations around the proposal remain unclear. One proposal would enjoin forces from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to gun down any airplanes flying over Libyan airspace. In a meeting Thursday, NATO leaders said such a plan would first require U.N. approval. 

U.S. President Barack Obama has hesitated on whether to take military action in Libya, even as Britain and France have pushed for intervention. 

The Arab League's move appeared to have been led by Gulf Arab nations, which announced their support for a U.N.-enforced no-fly zone on Monday. 

The six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council announced Friday that Mr. Gadhafi's government was illegitimate and that the oil-rich Gulf monarchies would "initiate contacts" with Libyan rebels instead. 

The Arab League suspended Libya's membership on Feb. 22.

Omani Foreign Minister Yusuf bin Alawi bin Abdullah said on Saturday that "U.N. intervention should be a preventative procedure and end when the Libyan crisis ends." But, he added, "There is consensus about protecting the Libyan people from bombing by the Libyan air force."

Catherine Ashton, the EU's high representative for foreign affairs and security policy, said she would travel to Cairo on Sunday to meet with the Arab League's outgoing secretary-general, Amr Moussa, to arrive at a "collaborative approach" for dealing with the North African country. 

Meanwhile, Rashid Khalikov, the U.N. humanitarian coordinator for Libya, arrived in Tripoli on Saturday to discuss with government officials access for humanitarian workers and aid delivery to the country's conflict areas, according to a U.N. statement.

"The international aid community has expressed concerns over the very limited access to various areas in Libya including those places where heavy fighting is taking place," it said. 

In a statement issued Friday, the EU said Col. Gadhafi's regime had "lost all legitimacy and is no longer an interlocutor for the EU." 

In place of Col. Gadhafi's regime, the EU said it "welcomes and encourages" the Transitional National Council as Libya's "political interlocutor," according to the statement released Friday. The National Council is a union of rebel leaders who oppose Col. Gadhafi's 41-year rule.

Col. Gadhafi's son, Seif al-Islam, said in a speech in Tripoli on Thursday that the regime didn't care about Arab states or the Arab League.

The Arab League said it will also initiate "cooperation and communication" with the Transitional National Council "against the crimes committed by the Libyan authorities," according to a statement released by the League following its Saturday meeting. The statement stopped short of recognizing the rebels as the sole legitimate government of the Libyan people.

Mr. Goga of the Transitional National Council also leveled accusations against Arab League member state Syria, alleging Damascus "conspired against the Libyan people" by sending Col. Gadhafi a ship filled with weapons. He also said Syrian pilots had been among those piloting planes shot down by rebel fighters, but said he couldn't say for sure whether the pilots had been sent by the Syrian government or were acting on their own as mercenaries. 

But the rebel leadership also appeared increasingly disconnected from developments on the battlefield. Mr. Goga denied Mr. Gadhafi's forces had taken control of Ras Lanuf, even as government officials took journalists on a tour of the battle-scarred oil city a day after rebel columns fled the city's outskirts amid heavy bombardment by fighter jets and artillery. 

Mr. Goga pledged rebel fighters would retake lost ground easily once the international community imposes a no-fly zone. He also said the rebels expected to receive new shipments of weapons but said he could provide no further details on where they were coming from. 

"We are capable of controlling all of Libya, but only after the no-fly zone is imposed," he said. "We are arming up and we will confront force with force. We are in the process of negotiating weapons deals and on the verge of getting new weapons."

Meanwhile, an al-Jazeera cameraman was killed Saturday in what the station described as an "armed ambush" on an al-Jazeera crew on the outskirts of Benghazi, the station said. 

Al-Jazeera identified the slain cameraman as Ali Hassan al-Jaber, a Qatari citizen. A correspondent for the station was also wounded in the attack. Col. Gadhafi's propaganda has singled out al-Jazeera with frequent scathing attacks on its coverage of Libya. 

Mr. al-Jaber's death was the first death of a journalist since the Libyan uprising began Feb. 15. 

Thousands of residents rallied outside the courthouse in central Benghazi on Saturday night to voice their support for the station after the attack. 

"With our blood, with our souls, we sacrifice for you al-Jazeera," protesters chanted, a knock off of a common chant throughout the Arab world usually reserved for Arab leaders. They hoisted flags for Qatar, the country where Al Jazeera is based. 

The attack comes amid growing jitters in eastern Libya over recent advances by government forces on the front lines, about 180 miles west of Benghazi. Government forces have reportedly started toward Brega, another oil-refinery town along the coastal road east of Ras Lanuf. 

Unconfirmed rumors have swirled in recent days that pro-Gadhafi agents have infiltrated Benghazi in growing numbers. 

Rebel forces, composed mostly of untrained and lightly armed volunteers, appear to be rapidly unraveling in the face of the government offensive, which has included heavy bombardments by air strikes, artillery shells and surface-to-surface rockets. 

Omar Hariri, who was tapped by the the Transitional National Council to oversee military affairs for the rebels, said the rebel fighting force was still in tact and able to fight. 

"We will fight, and we are powerful," Mr. Hariri told a news conference. "We know how to fight and we know how to win."

He said the rebel fighters were prepared to stop the government's advance outside of Brega and were capable of defending Benghazi. 

--Sam Dagher in Tripoli contributed to this article.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 