SEOUL—South Korea is considering investing part of its foreign-exchange reserves in yuan-denominated Chinese securities to diversify its portfolio as its reserves rise to a record, a senior Bank of Korea official said Wednesday. 

"China will be a good investment destination for us in the mid- to long-term, given the country's efforts to make the yuan a global currency," said Hong Taeg-ki, chief of the BOK's reserve-management group. 

He said South Korea's foreign-exchange reserves need to be diversified to include yuan assets, although any significant investment in Chinese securities isn't likely in the near future given the strict Chinese rules on investment by foreign investors. 

"China's opening of its capital markets to foreigners is still very limited. They say foreigners can invest up to $1 billion, but actually foreign investors hardly ever own as much as $200 million," he said. 

South Korea currently invests in yuan assets by way of its contribution to the Asian Bond Fund, but the amount is "negligible," he added. 

The BOK applied for qualified foreign institutional investor status in China early this year, but hasn't yet got the approval from the Chinese government, he said. 

Under the QFII program, only approved foreign institutions are allowed to invest in China's stocks and bonds in accordance with quotas set by Beijing's financial authorities. 

The BOK has said it is diversifying its investments to include assets denominated in major currencies other than the U.S. dollar, including the yen, euro and the U.K. pound, to shield it from the volatility in the value of the dollar. 

The move came as South Korea's foreign-exchange reserves rose to a record for the fourth straight month in April, mainly due to higher returns on non-U.S. dollar assets as major currencies strengthened against the dollar. 

As of the end of April, South Korea's reserves reached a record $307.2 billion—the seventh largest in the world, behind China, Japan, Russia, Taiwan, Brazil and India. 

The proportion of dollar holdings in South Korea's portfolio rebounded slightly last year after declining for two years straight. As of the end of 2010, U.S. dollar-denominated assets accounted for 63.7% of the country's total forex reserves, up 0.6 percentage point from a year earlier. 

Mr. Hong said the central bank's move to invest in yuan assets doesn't mean an immediate change in investment strategies nor is it aimed at reducing the U.S. dollar's position in the BOK's foreign-exchange reserves.