SAN'A, Yemen—Maj. Gen. Ali Mohsen al-Ahmar has helped President Ali Abdullah Saleh rule Yemen since the late 1970s, making him an unlikely defector as well as a controversial figure to shepherd the country toward democracy.

Track events day by day.

Gen. Ahmar was the most prominent military figure to side with opposition protesters this week in calling for Mr. Saleh to quit. He has since become the lead negotiator for the opposition.

His ties with Saudi Arabia, which is helping to broker the crisis, and support from troops and his tribe make him among those most likely to lead a transitional government should Mr. Saleh quit.

Yet U.S. officials and many Yemenis view Gen. Ahmar as a strongman with a reputation compromised by allegations of corruption, which have been aired in U.S. cables and by Yemeni officials. For instance, a U.S. diplomatic cable written in August 2005 and released by WikiLeaks says Gen. Ahmar was considered a "major beneficiary of diesel smuggling."

Gen. Ahmar has never been charged with corruption. He couldn't be reached for comment, and previous requests for comment went unanswered. 

Gen. Ahmar has been "always sort of in the shadows as the back-up dictator," said a Western diplomat in the region. Even if Mr. Saleh steps down, "you could have a Yemen that looks a lot like Yemen," the diplomat said.

Gen. Ahmar, the military commander of Yemen's northwestern region, is around 60 years old and hails from the same village as Mr. Saleh, who is 66. He worked with Mr. Saleh to defeat the Soviet-backed separatist state of South Yemen in the 1980s. In the 1990s, he used force to put down a renewed separatist threat by deputizing Islamist warriors who had fought in Afghanistan. 

Those victories helped solidify President Saleh's position as leader of a re-united Yemen, and earned Gen. Ahmar the reputation as the country's most powerful military leader. He was also considered by diplomats to be the country's second-most powerful political figure, behind the president, for his deft touch in negotiating Yemen's tangled web of tribal and religious politics. Such skills could make him the right person to manage a political transition toward democracy, diplomats say. 

But his tribal outlook and past use of force to solve problems make many Western diplomats wary of seeing him come to the political forefront in Yemen, a country widely considered on the brink of failure as a result of President Saleh's similar leadership qualities.

Another legacy of President Saleh's rule—a weak central government—has bolstered Gen. Ahmar's own prestige and fortune, according to diplomats. 

The lack of government control over the far-flung Yemeni regions means that he and the country's other four regional commanders have dual roles as army chiefs and local governors, allowing them to channel government funds to residents for development projects—or withhold funds as punishment should they work against his interests.

People who have conducted business with Gen. Ahmar describe him as a cross between a warlord and an oligarch. U.S. diplomats have had minimal contact with him, in part, current and former officials suggest, because Mr. Saleh saw him as a potential rival.

Gen. Ahmar is also considered to be a conservative religious man, with leanings toward the Salafi school of Islam that many Saudis practice. 

Under his command of northwestern Yemen, Saudi preachers have made inroads in building mosques and conservative religious schools. 

Some residents of the area complain that sectarian tensions in the region have risen as a result of the Saudi-run and funded schools, and helped ignite recent bouts of fighting between rebels, known as the Houthis, and the central government.

Gen. Ahmar led the battles against multiple Houthi uprisings in the past few years. Saudi Arabia intervened in the clashes in late 2009 on the side of Gen. Ahmar.

—Margaret Coker, Adam Entous and Matthew Rosenberg contributed to this article.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 