TUCSON, Ariz.—Arizona federal Judge  John Roll appears to have died while saving the life of another man during the shooting rampage here on Jan. 8, according to an investigator who has viewed surveillance video from the crime scene.

Video from the  Safeway supermarket near Tucson shows the accused gunman,  Jared Loughner, walking past a concrete pillar, raising his gun and firing at close range directly at U.S. Congresswoman  Gabrielle Giffords, who is standing off-camera, said  Chris Nanos, a captain with the Pima County Sheriff's Department who has viewed the video. 

Only a wisp of what appears to be Ms. Giffords' hair is seen on the video, Mr. Nanos said. The gunman fires first at Ms. Giffords "without hesitation" then "fires indiscriminately at the crowd," he said. The group had assembled to hear Ms. Giffords at a planned constituency event that day. 

"He wheels this direction and that direction firing," Mr. Nanos said. The shooting killed six people and wounded 13 people, including Ms. Giffords, who is in serious condition at a Tucson hospital after a bullet passed through her brain. 

As the shooting starts, the video shows Judge Roll pushing another man,  Rob Barber, onto the ground, Mr. Nanos said. "It looks to us as though he is pushing against  Ron Barber to move him out of the way." Both men fall to the ground; both are shot. The judge was shot in the back and died.

"It's pretty evident to me that Judge Roll was a hero … if Judge Roll had not pushed Mr. Barber his wounds might have been fatal," Mr. Nanos said. "Judge Roll's actions are of a man trying to save another man's life."

Judge Roll, 63 years old, attended Ms. Giffords's event to thank her for supporting his effort to get help handling his district's high number of immigration cases. Judge Roll was appointed to the federal bench by President  George H.W. Bush in 1991, and had served as chief judge of the District of Arizona since 2006. 

Video taken from the store that day has been handed over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which is analyzing the video. Details of the video were first reported by the  Washington Post.

Many of the shooting victims, including nine-year-old Christina-Taylor Green, aren't seen on the video because of the vantage point of the camera, Mr. Nanos said. The video shows the shooter, Mr. Barber and Judge Roll. "It's real easy to tell that all he did was stand there and fire at people," Mr. Nanos said. 

The video footage is part of the evidence that investigators say lead them to believe that Ms. Giffords was the target, since she is the first one shot. The video shows a man running past a concrete pillar, and shooting Ms. Giffords at close range. "There's no hesitation. Once he gets around the pillar, it's obvious what his intent is. That's why we believe his target was exactly who we thought it was," said Mr. Nanos.

Mr. Barber was released from a Tucson hospital Friday, in time to attend Judge Roll's funeral that morning.

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 