TOKYO—A major unit at one of Japan's largest coal-fired power plants was brought back online early Saturday, helping ease power shortages that have crippled Japan's industrial activity and hampered cleanup efforts since the March 11 earthquake. 

  Electric Power Development Co.
9513


1.42
%




, also known as J-Power, has restarted commercial operations at its 600-megawatt No.1 unit at the nine-year-old Isogo power plant west of Tokyo, a spokesman said. J-Power, an electricity wholesaler that operates seven coal-fired power plants, had already restarted the twin No.2 unit at Isogo, which was automatically halted when the earthquake hit. 

However, damage to several other major coal-fired power stations and ports in northeastern Japan—and choke points in the country's grid network—mean the sector will struggle to provide its normal 21% of Japan's electricity for an indeterminate period. 

In the longer term, permanent damage caused to Japan's Pacific coast nuclear reactors—and the likely lengthy delays in upgrading its aging fleet of reactors—means the country will have little option but to use much more gas, oil and coal for power generation. Japan is already the world's largest coal importer by volume, although China has been threatening to overtake it. 

As of Saturday, a string of coal-fired plants were still out of operation, including several operated by Japan's largest utility,  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, or Tepco, whose attention is focused on bringing its quake- and tsunami-damaged Daiichi Fukushima nuclear reactors under control. 

Apart from dealing with the immediate crisis and starting on what could be extended checks and repairs at some thermal power stations, Japan's utilities and coal importers now face a complicated period of negotiations with suppliers. 

Among Tepco's supply agreements is a 10-year contract for Australian coal, which expires at the end of this month. Though negotiations for a renewal haven't been completed, supplies are expected to continue to arrive, with price and possibly volume adjustments to be made later. 

Talks last week on Australian coal prices for the April 2011-March 2012 term between  Xstrata PLC,  Tohoku Electric Power Co.
9506


0.88
%




 and other Japanese utilities were postponed. 

While coal prices agreed upon in Japan-Australia negotiations are a regional benchmark, Indonesia—the world's largest exporter of thermal coal—looks well placed to meet any near- or mid-term extra demand from Japan, partly as some Australian mines are still suffering from flood damage. 

Tepco's 600 MW No.5 coal-power unit at its Hirono power station and its 1 GW Hitachinaka coal power station have remained offline since March 11, with no schedule set for a restart. Also out of operation is Tohuku's 2 GW Haramachi power station on the Pacific coast near Fukushima, which suffered flood damage. 

Tohoku Electric declared force majeure last week, telling suppliers it was unable to accept some previously contracted coal deliveries. 

Also idled and damaged by the tsunami is the 1.6 GW joint venture Tohoku-Tepco coal-fired plant, known as Joban Kyodo Karyoku, which has no restart date in sight, a spokesman said. 

Power cuts since the earthquake are a result of a both power stations being taken offline and the structure of the national power grid, which makes transmitting electricity across the country difficult. 

Citibank, in a research report, has suggested Japan could need an additional seven million tons of thermal coal this year, on top of the 102 million tons it imported last year. Barclays Capital has a more modest forecast of a two million ton increase in Japan's imports this year. 

Russia Energy Minister Sergei Shmatko said Thursday his country was ready to send more coal to Japan and that talks with Japanese companies would be held soon. 

Even before the quake, several new major coal-fired power stations were planned or under construction in Japan. Tepco previously said it expected two new coal-fired units to start operations in late 2013—a 1 GW plant at Hitachinaka and the 600 MW Hiromo No. 6 unit northeast of Tokyo, and J-Power has several plans for new coal-fired generating stations. 

 Write to  Mari Iwata at mari.iwata@dowjones.com and Simon Hall at simon.hall@dowjones.com 