BRUSSELS—The European Union's highest court declared illegal the widespread practice of charging men and women different rates for insurance, setting in motion an overhaul of how life, auto and health policies are written across Europe.

Two Belgian men had challenged the higher life-insurance premiums charged to members of their sex, arguing that it was discriminatory. In a ruling Tuesday, the Luxembourg-based European Court of Justice agreed.

The judgment can't be appealed. It will have vast implications: Insurers routinely charge women, who live longer, lower premiums for life insurance; young male drivers, who statistically cause more accidents, pay higher premiums for auto policies. 

In short, the victory for equality of the sexes will end up costing women money. 

The court ruled that the practice runs afoul of the EU's overarching laws banning discrimination. The union's Charter of Fundamental Rights enumerates 14 categories on which discrimination is prohibited; sex is the first. A separate provision states that "equality between men and women must be ensured in all areas."

The issue is expected to have limited to no impact in the U.S., where insurance is regulated by the states and only a couple of states prohibit use of sex as a category in rate calculations, according to industry executives. The subject has attracted relatively little controversy in recent years. Instead, groups advocating on behalf of consumers have been much more concerned about the use of credit-related factors, which car insurers began incorporating about 15 years ago. 

Sex "is still taken into account as part of complex formulas," and plays a big role with younger drivers in particular, but its importance has diminished as insurers adopted credit-based insurance scoring, which they consider a highly reliable indicator of future loss, says  Robert Detlefsen, a public-policy specialist at trade group National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies in Indianapolis. 

In the EU case, the judges said insurers operating in the 27-member European Union have until Dec. 21, 2012, to change their practices. 

"It will be a big administrative change, and it requires a big change in thinking," says  Philip Jarvis of the law firm Allen & Overy in London. Mr. Jarvis says insurers may have to collect more individual data on policy holders to compensate for the loss of sex as a quick dividing line. That could accelerate, for instance, the adoption of vehicle "black boxes" or other devices to plug into onboard diagnostic computers to give insurers a direct look at driving habits. 

Test-Achats, the Brussels-based consumer group that brought the case along with the two male plaintiffs, called the ruling a "victory for consumers, for men and women and for the entire European Union."

 The CEA, a Brussels-based trade group for European insurers and reinsurers, said the ruling was "bad news for insurance customers" and would push costs up.

Slicing up a pool of customers by different risk levels is central to pricing insurance efficiently.

A study last year commissioned by the British insurers' group found excluding sex would have a particular impact on the auto policies of young women, whose premiums could rise by as much as 25%. 

Premiums for young men would fall. Similar but less pronounced effects would be seen for life-insurance policies. 

Insurers had been bracing for Tuesday's ruling, in part because an advisory opinion handed down last September by a court officer called an advocate general had recommended declaring sex-based pricing illegal. Insurance stocks were little changed Tuesday.

The dispute stems from a 2004 European Union law that prohibits discrimination in commerce. The law carved out a narrow exception: Insurers can account for sex in setting premiums when the use is "based on relevant and accurate actuarial and statistical data."

 Text of the ruling 

The Belgian men, with the assistance of Test-Achats, challenged the exception in a Belgian court, which referred the case to the EU high court. At issue: Can individual men and women be treated differently based solely on statistics that apply to the entirety of the sexes?

The advocate general, Juliane Kokott, said no. There was no compelling evidence, she wrote, that women live longer or drive more safely because they are biologically women.

Underlying factors affecting longevity or prudent driving—such as drinking habits or the desire to engage in risky behavior—might be associated statistically with one or other sex. But that, she said, doesn't mean insurers can choose a price for a particular customer based on sex.

The law, Ms. Kokott argued, doesn't permit insurers to charge different rates based on race even if insurers demonstrate a statistically significant correlation between risk factors and skin color. (For decades race has been prohibited as a ratings factor in the U.S.)

In the final ruling Tuesday, the judges of the European Court of Justice provided a simpler chain of logic: The insurance-pricing exception "works against the achievement of equal treatment between men and women" and is "incompatible" with the provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. 

 Write to  Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com and Leslie Scism at leslie.scism@wsj.com 