The company that operates the Trans Alaska Pipeline told operators on the North Slope to cut crude production by 95%, after discovering an oil leak.

Alyeska Pipeline Service Co.'s order was a big blow for  BP PLC, the largest oil producer in Alaska. The centerpiece of BP's operations in the state is at Prudhoe Bay, the largest producing oil field in the U.S. 

The North Slope of Alaska produces about 630,000 barrels of oil a day—about 9% of total U.S. output. BP accounts for nearly two-thirds of that.

The order affects BP and other producers, such as  ConocoPhillips.
COP


1.02
%




 Alyeska is jointly owned by BP, Conoco,  Exxon Mobil
XOM


0.84
%




 Corp, Unocal Corp. and Koch Industries.

BP spokesman  Steve Rinehart called the incident a "significant event." He said BP periodically has been forced to cut output due to large-scale power outages or when heavy winds have interrupted tanker loadings at the port of Valdez.

Industry observers said the shutdown, while affecting a big chunk of U.S. domestic crude-oil production, shouldn't have a significant impact on oil supplies, thanks to the large amount of oil held in storage tanks in the port of Valdez.

Personnel at Alyeska Pump Station 1 discovered oil leaking into the station's booster-pump building on Saturday morning at 8:15, according to  Michelle Egan, a spokeswoman for Alyeska. 

The leak appeared to be from a section of piping at the station that is encased in concrete. Alyeska shut down the Trans Alaska Pipeline at 8:50 a.m. and crews were on site to assess the situation and isolate the source of the leak.

Ms. Egan said additional resources were en route to support containment, recovery and repair efforts. 

She said no injuries had been reported as a result of the incident. 

Ms. Egan said it was too early to ascertain how much oil had leaked and determine any potential environmental impact. 

"Until we excavate everything around the concrete encasement we can't say definitively that it hasn't leaked out into the soil," she said. She said the shutdown of the pipeline "gives us time to assess the situation and do it without harm to the environment."

After the pipeline was shut down, Alyeska ordered all North Slope producers to scale back production to 5% of normal levels. 

Ms. Egan said the leak was "an unusual event" for Alaska. North Slope producers are occasionally advised by Alyeska to prorate production, or reduce output proportionally, for example, when maintenance work is performed on the pipeline. Rarely are orders to cut production so drastic, however.

 Write to  Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 