 European governments are considering ways to reduce the debt burdens of struggling euro-zone countries such as Greece through bond buybacks, as part of a broader package of measures aimed at ending the crisis of confidence in Europe's single currency. 

The buyback ideas being discussed would allow Greece or other indebted countries to borrow money from Europe's bailout fund, and use it to buy up their own bonds at depressed prices from investors or from the European Central Bank, said senior European officials.

Rising prices for food, energy and other commodities could drive up consumer prices in the euro zone and there is "significant uncertainty" as to whether food supply will be able to meet demand in the long run, the European Central Bank cautioned. 

 Ireland's besieged Prime Minister Brian Cowen named March 11 for the country's much-anticipated general election, setting off a 50-day-long campaign that will almost certainly result in his ruling Fianna Fail party losing most of its seats. 

Earlier, opposition parties had called for an immediate election in the wake of a surprise wave of resignations by government ministers who are not standing in the election due in March. 

 Ireland is facing a wave of mass emigration on a scale unseen since the 1980s, as young people desperate for work turn their backs on an economy ravaged by debt crises, high unemployment and tough austerity measures. A new report by a think tank said 100,000 people are expected to leave Ireland between April 2010 and April 2012, which averages out as roughly 1,000 a week. 

U.K. industrial output is expected to pick up further in the three months from January, but price expectations are at their highest level for more than two years, a survey by the Confederation of British Industry showed. 

The U.K. government said it will give up a controversial power that allows terror suspects to be held for 28 days without charge, after a major review of counter-terror measures. introduced by the former Labour government but must be voted on every year, would not be extended when it expires at midnight on Jan. 24. 

 Alan Johnson, the U.K. opposition Labour Party's finance spokesman, stood down from the post after less than four months in the job, citing personal reasons in a move that will bring little comfort to the party's new leader, Ed Miliband. He will be replaced by Ed Balls, an economist and a former Economic Secretary to the Treasury during the last Labour government. 

German producer prices continued to spiral higher in December, as energy prices propelled the headline index to its fastest annual increase since late 2008. 

A bus at Frankfurt's international airport sped into a group of people waiting at a bus stop, killing a young woman and injuring five others, two severely, police said. The bus, which was carrying airport employees, hit people at one of the hub's entrance gates in the morning, a police spokesman said. 

Swiss police have arrested a banker who handed details of rich tax cheats to WikiLeaks, prosecutors said. Rudolf Elmer was arrested late Wednesday, shortly after a Zurich court found him guilty of coercion and breaking Switzerland's strict bank-secrecy laws in an earlier case. 

 A top Vatican official waded into a scandal that has embroiled Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, expressing concern over an investigation into whether the billionaire media mogul gave gifts and cash to an underage woman in exchange for sexual favors. 

 Turkey's central bank unexpectedly cut its key interest rate to a record low of 6.25% and said further bank reserve hikes were necessary, in a continuation of its policy to curb a rapid inflow of speculative investment, or so-called "hot money." 

 Chinese President Hu Jintao reiterated the need for Beijing and Washington to work together and urged the U.S. to respect China's sovereignty over Taiwan and Tibet. 

Earlier, U.S. lawmakers pressed the Chinese president on a variety of sensitive issues during his visit to Capitol Hill.

The Obama administration plans to move ahead with a new round of military tribunals in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, underscoring the president's difficulty in meeting his goal to close the U.S. prison there.

U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords, who was shot in the head Jan. 8, may have attempted to speak and could be walking in two months, her husband and doctors said at a news conference.

Sales of previously occupied homes rose more than expected last month, ending a rocky year for the housing market on an encouraging note.

Separate reports showed the number of people applying for jobless benefits fell in the latest week, and an index of leading indicators advanced in December.

U.S. futures regulators were set to propose rules to provide for the orderly liquidation of derivatives contracts in the event one of the counterparties is seized to prevent a broader market meltdown. Regulators will also move to streamline regulations and open up certain markets in complex financial instruments to more participants. 

 Authorities arrested more than 100 suspected members of organized-crime families in New York, New Jersey and New England on charges including murder, extortion and racketeering. 

 China's economy unexpectedly accelerated in the fourth quarter of 2010 despite a series of tightening measures, spotlighting Beijing's difficulties managing growth and fueling market concerns about further government moves to combat inflation.  

The fourth quarter's 9.8% expansion in China's gross domestic product makes it all but certain that China became the world's second largest economy in 2010, ending Japan's 42-year reign in that position.

Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan criticized China for the opaque expansion of its defense capabilities and maritime activities, and stressed the need to strengthen bilateral communications, using channels such as a new hotline between the national leaders and exchanges between political parties. 

 South Korea accepted a proposal from North Korea to hold high-level military talks, a move that signals a possible breakthrough in a deadlock between the rivals following deadly clashes, but Seoul warned that the North also must promise not to stage any further provocative acts against the South.  

 Newly-elected Afghan lawmakers said they plan to convene the country's parliament on Sunday in defiance of President Hamid Karzai's order to postpone the inauguration, a move that could bring a constitutional crisis and inflame ethnic tensions. 

 The U.S. and other world powers meeting with Iran this week will press Tehran to take concrete steps to ensure its nuclear activities are peaceful, American and European officials involved in the negotiations said.  

 Dozens of Iraqis were killed or wounded in bomb attacks targeting pilgrims flocking to the Shiite holy city of Karbala for the culmination of an annual religious rite. The latest bloodshed followed a series of suicide bombings against security forces this week and brought the overall toll to more than 100 killed and 400 wounded, according to health and security officials. 

 Ivory Coast's internationally recognized president, Alassane Ouattara, said he may lobby foreign governments for sweeping new sanctions to oust rival Laurent Gbagbo, who refuses to step down after losing a presidential run-off.  

Kenya's largest newspaper printed shocking images of what appeared to be undercover police shooting three unarmed suspects at point-blank range on a busy Nairobi highway during midday, prompting a barrage of criticism.

Kenya's Minister for Internal Security George Saitoti confirmed three people were killed in the incident, adding that three police officers are under investigation and could face charges.