For Japan, rebuilding after the earthquake will be the relatively easy part. Surviving in the longer run in the nation's current form—that will be trickier.



There are benefits to being a land of social cohesion with a generally homogenous population trained from birth in the virtues of the common good. We're seeing that now as Japan picks itself up after a serious blow.

And we've seen this resolve before: after the Kobe earthquake in 1995, after Japan's cities were incinerated in World War II, after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, after the Great Kanto Earthquake in 1923. The country has chops when it comes to muscling through.

The communal, consultative instinct that binds Japanese society will now be tapped again to mourn the dead, clear debris, and rebuild homes and businesses. Toyota, General Motors and Volvo may be flummoxed for the moment because supplies from Japan have been disrupted. But if the past is any indication, the nation's link in the global supply chain will be repaired and improved—and more quickly than many expect.





 Join WSJ economics editor David Wessel for a live chat about the corporate imact of the Japan quake today, March 25, at 1:30 p.m. ET. Ask your questions now. 

Japan has experience in this area, too, both small and large. When a solvent tank blew up at a  Sumitomo Chemical Co.
4005


0.98
%




 plant in 1993, wrecking the factory, spot prices for computer chips round the world rocketed. The plant made fully two thirds of the world's supply of a chemical used to seal computer chips into packages. It was a choke point in the global supply chain. The market feared shortages.

But within months, Sumitomo had cobbled one of its production lines back together, earlier than expected. Other Japanese suppliers had also rapidly ramped up production. Suddenly the global market was forecasting too much supply, not too little.

Kobe reemerged not just as a manufacturing and shipping hub, its chief industries before the quake killed 6,400 people. It used the crisis to rethink its future and recreate itself as a biomedical center. The government kicked in funding and helped cut red tape, such as restrictions on visas for foreign researchers. Scores of medical companies from Japan, the U.S. and Germany poured in.

While homogeneity and social cohesion can give energy and direction to a nation, they also have a downside, and Japan is seeing it in brutal relief. Here's where the longer-term outlook is less certain.

Japan's fear of other cultures disrupting its values has kept the door all but shut to immigrants. Its own rigid norms also still keep workers in the office late into the night and thus give women a difficult choice: have a career or have a family. More are choosing the former.

The result: Japan's birthrate isn't replacing the number of Japanese who die each year. And Japan's immigration policies keep the nation from tapping into the global flow of brains, brawn and taxpayers that bolsters economies elsewhere. The country is shrinking.

Sometimes, too, cohesion is just another word for insularity or even self-dealing. Japan's vast national bureaucracy is a case in point. Decades of single-party rule stunted the nation's political development. That left the bureaucrats to run the country.

The revolving door separating Japan's regulators from the industries they regulate is well oiled and much used. Senior bureaucrats generally expect a lucrative retirement post in the private sector. 

The effect is predictable: Banks in Japan ran amok in the 1980s and 1990s in part because they were sometimes run by ex-officials from the Ministry of Finance and central bank, whose former subordinates had moved up in the regulatory bodies. In Japan, where rank is highly respected, the ties continued to bind: The new regulators had trouble confronting their former bosses, even when the banks teetered.

The practice is called amakudari, and it means "descent from heaven." Several former officials from the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, which regulates the nuclear industry, have enjoyed private-sector salaries at the  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 

One is  Toru Ishida, the former director general of METI, who left the agency last year and a few months later joined the utility.

Tepco is the company that manages the Fukushima nuclear reactors now emitting radioactivity across northeastern Japan. The facility has a history of accidents, and the company has a record of fudging safety data. Both Tepco and its regulators have been criticized for a faltering response to the latest crisis.

"There are two really big questions hanging over Japan," says  Clyde Prestowitz, a former U.S. trade negotiator who writes on Asia. "The population is shrinking, and in the long term they're committing slow suicide. And second is the bureaucratic, dysfunctional system. Politicians don't have a lot of power. And the regulators don't regulate industry for the public, they regulate it for their own retirement."

In both regards—how it survives in the long term, and how it chooses to manage itself—the clock is running for Japan. Cohesion is one thing, stasis quite another.

 Write to  John Bussey at john.bussey@wsj.com 