The battle for Libya is stealing the headlines, and for good reason. But economic prospects for the Middle East turn on the direction Egypt takes.

A decade from now, will Egypt look more like Poland, an Eastern European post-communism success, or more like Pakistan, an economically dysfunctional breeding ground for terrorists?

The Middle East sorely needs a success story. As Latin America prospers and growth in sub-Saharan Africa picks up, the Middle East and North Africa stand out as economic disappointments, especially for their huge cohorts of unemployed youth.

Poland, after missteps and wrong turns, emerged from the darkness of World War II, the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet empire as a model. Its per capita income, on a purchasing power basis, has more than tripled since 1990. It was the only European Union economy to grow amid the global recession of 2009. It was one of only a few in Eastern Europe to avoid a foreign borrowing binge.

Egypt isn't Poland, of course. "Much of Eastern Europe lacked any basic mechanisms to deal with contract rights and private ownership," says  Kenneth Froot, a Harvard Business School economist who studied that region's transition. In contrast, he says, "Egypt is not starting at ground level, but a ways above that." And Egypt, with 85 million people packed along the Nile, has seen its population nearly double since the recently ousted president, Hosni Mubarak, took power 30 years ago; Poland's population hasn't grown. 

On the other hand, the politics of Poland were more favorable to modern capitalism. In Poland, the U.S. was on the right side of history. In Egypt, it was not. In Poland, communism was bankrupt and free-market capitalism seemed to many of the country's 38 million people to be their only shot at prosperity. In Egypt, free markets stink of crony capitalism in which the army and Mr. Mubarak's buddies got the goodies.

Yet, as Poland was 20 years ago, Egypt is at a once-in-generation moment. It's easy to sketch the scenario in which Egypt blows it. The army could maintain control behind a façade of democracy and protect elites who benefited from the growth produced by significant economic reforms that Mr. Mubarak blessed. Four things have to go right for Egypt to seize the moment.

First, the young protesters of Tahrir Square have to keep the pressure on the military. A lot depends on which way they go. If they've been soured by privatization that engorged the cronies, will they demand the security and subsidies of the state over the risks, competition and dynamism that comes with a vibrant private sector? In short, do they want government jobs? Or a shot at being hired—and maybe fired—by an entrepreneurial company?

Second, Egypt needs to trade. No developing-market country has propelled itself to prosperity in recent times without exporting. Trade means jobs and brings relentless pressure on economies to up their games, essential for improving living standards.

Yet the countries of the Middle East, the ones without oil, are export wimps. Exports of goods amount to 15% of their total output today, not much more than 20 years ago despite the explosion of global trade. Developing economies overall have boosted exports to 25% of output from less than 15% in 1990, the International Monetary Fund says. Thailand alone (population 66 million) exports more than Afghanistan, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania, Morocco, Pakistan, Syria and Tunisia (combined population 345 million) altogether. The countries of the Middle East barely trade among each other, let along with the economic powerhouses of Asia.

Third, Egypt must respond to its demographic and ecological challenges, such as the torrent of youth seeking work, the rising upstream demand for water from the Nile, and the threat of climate change. "If they could do one single thing, it would be to slow population growth," says development economist Jeffrey Sachs of Columbia University.

Fourth, Egypt needs help. "While the heavy lifting must be done by revamped domestic institutions," says Mohamed El-Erian, the Egyptian-born chief executive of bond-manager Pimco, "Egypt's friends and allies can help."

While "IMF" is a dirty word in Egypt, the country will need near-term help to stabilize its economy. Perhaps Saudi Arabia, forced to choose between watching Egypt succeed and watching it descend into chaos, will pitch in. If it is to trade more, Europe–and China–must open markets wider to Egyptian exports. And the U.S. needs to rethink the $1.5 billion in aid it sends to Egypt every year, more than 80% of which goes to arms in a country that longs for infrastructure, education and export prowess. 

"Egypt," the Moroccan poet  Tahar Ben Jelloun, once said, "has suffered more ordeals than the other countries to get where it is." True, but the same might be said about Poland. 

 Write to  David Wessel at capital@wsj.com 