 France's government, Renault's biggest shareholder, criticized the car maker over its false accusation of corporate espionage against three senior managers. 

BMW expects earnings and profitability to rise further in 2011, driven by the launch of new vehicles and streamlined costs. BMW Chief Executive Norbert Reithofer said the world's best-selling luxury car maker targets a margin on earnings before interest and tax of more than 8% this year in its core auto segment after reaching 8% last year.

India's Tata Motors posted a 14% rise in its global vehicle sales in February to 102,411 autos as it sold more Land Rover sports utility vehicles as well as cars, trucks and buses. Sales of Land Rover SUVs grew 33% in February to 18,440 vehicles, but those of Jaguar cars fell 2% to 3,213. 

 Multiple U.S. and European banks have been contacted by U.S. regulators as part of a probe into possible manipulation of the London interbank offered rate, a key global benchmark, according to people familiar with the situation. UBS, one of 20 banks that provide daily borrowing costs to establish Libor, said in its annual report it had received subpoenas from U.S. regulators that are investigating whether the bank has manipulated Libor.  

 Deutsche Bank disclosed that its exposure to the financially troubled nations in the euro zone more than doubled as a result of its acquisition of Postbank last year.  

Deutsche's top investment banker Anshu Jain saw his pay rise to around €7.6 million ($10.6 million) for the year, up from around €7.05 million in 2009. 

Deutsche Chief Executive Josef Ackermann took home €6.3 million—16% less than a year earlier—though he also received a deferred cash sum valued at €2.5 million. 

 Intesa Sanpaolo, Italy's largest retail bank, said fourth-quarter net profit fell 7% to €505 million ($707 million) as higher taxes and lower insurance income outpaced a sharp reduction in provisions against bad loans. 

Private-equity company Bridgepoint said it bought German specialty chemicals company CABB from AXA Private Equity for an undisclosed sum, but a person familiar with the situation said the deal was worth in excess of €340 million ($476 million). 

Siemens said its stake in nuclear energy venture Areva NP has been independently valued at €1.62 billion ($2.27 billion), paving the way for a long-awaited sale of the stake. Siemens holds a 34% stake in Areva NP, with the remainder owned by French nuclear-power provider Areva. 

Northrop Grumman said its board has approved the spinoff of its shipbuilding business, to be known as Huntington Ingalls Industries. The move comes in the wake of the U.S. Navy's new 30-year fleet plan and broader Pentagon spending cuts and a shift in military priorities toward smaller, more-nimble weapons platforms. 

 PepsiCo unveiled a bottle made entirely of plant material, which it says bests the technology of competitor Coca-Cola and reduces its potential carbon footprint. 

Ugandan tax officials and U.K.-based Tullow Oil signed a memorandum of understanding to resolve a long-running tax dispute that has held up oil and gas development in the African country. The agreement will clear the way for Tullow to close a deal with Heritage Oil to take over assets that had been jointly operated by both companies. 

 Total said it is in negotiations with U.S. authorities to settle a probe over allegations that the French energy company paid bribes to Iranian officials to obtain contracts in the early 2000s.  

Oil & Natural Gas Corp. might not get Exxon Mobil's 25% stake in the Block 31 exploration block in Angola due to a higher bid from another company, the chairman of the Indian state-run company said. 

 Chevron plans to start early work on an expansion of its 43 billion Australian dollar (US$43.45 billion) Gorgon liquefied natural gas project in Australia next year.  

KBC Group, the Belgian financial services company, said the Luxembourg regulator has blocked the planned €1.35 billion ($1.89 billion) sale of its KBL European Private Bankers unit to the Hinduja Group. The company gave no detail of why the acquisition was blocked. 

 Nasdaq OMX chief executive Robert Greifeld is determined to mount a counterbid for NYSE Euronext, say people close to him. But as the outlines of his approach come into view, it's clear Greifeld will face a most difficult journey, as he'll have to win at least five different battles with regulators, shareholders, politicians and other markets.  

 Novartis said an experimental drug for the treatment of myelofibrosis, a rare form of blood cancer, met the goals of a late-stage study, which should pave the way to file the drug for regulatory approval in the second quarter.  

Verizon Wireless, which is jointly owned by Verizon Communications and Vodafone Group, said it would launch its first 4G smartphone, the HTC ThunderBolt, on Thursday, finally bringing a consumer-friendly device to its super-fast U.S. mobile network.

Qihoo 360 Technology, the Chinese security-software provider, said it plans to sell up to $200 million of American depositary shares in an initial public offering, the latest Chinese Internet firm to tap the U.S. market for funding. 

Carlyle Group said it bought "special effects" software developer The Foundry from Advent Venture Partners and plans to support the company as it increases its current offering to the film industry and expands into new product areas. 

U.K. regulator Ofcom said it will cut prices that the four national mobile operators charge to transfer calls from other networks by 80% over the next four years in a move which it expects will benefit consumers and promote competition.

The deadline for second-round bids for Polish mobile phone operator Polkomtel has been extended from this week to the end of April, a person familiar with the situation said. The reason for the extension is unclear but people familiar with the situation suggest that due diligence is taking longer than expected. 

Enel said net profit in 2010 slipped 21% to €4.39 billion ($6.15 billion), but it raised its dividend and said it expects cash flow to increase through 2015.

Enel also confirmed its plans to launch its Italian nuclear power program, even amid growing global concerns about nuclear power plants in the wake of Japan's nuclear power crisis.