The past four months have not been kind to investors in municipal-bond funds.

Read the full  Investing in Funds report .

The average long-term tax-exempt fund is down 4.4% since Nov. 1, according to Morningstar Inc., and no fund in the category has avoided losses. The average intermediate muni fund is down 2.2%, and only a handful are up.

But investors can use the recent turmoil to see how well their funds protected their money when the going got tough.

Starting in early November, expectations for stronger economic growth sent longer-term yields across the bond market higher. Bond prices, which move in the opposite direction of yields, fell. For muni investors, this was compounded by growing fiscal woes among state and local governments around the country.

A dividing line for performance among muni funds was the degree to which they had been holding bonds from weaker issuers in order to juice their yields. Holding debt of financially stronger entities "helps when things get a little bit sloppy in the market and people are worried about quality," says  James Evans, a manager of  Eaton Vance Tax-Advantaged Bond Strategies Long Term, which has fallen 1.6% over the past four months.

  JPMorgan Intermediate Tax Free Bond has lost just 1.4% since Nov. 1. The fund held more than 16% of assets in "pre-refunded" bonds on Oct. 31. These are regarded as super-safe because the money for future interest payments is held in escrow, usually invested in U.S. Treasurys. "When the headlines hit and people were talking about defaults...people immediately wanted to swap into the highest-quality paper," which included demand for pre-refunded bonds, says  Richard Taormina, head of municipal-bond strategies at J.P. Morgan Asset Management.

  Marshall Intermediate Tax-Free, meanwhile, was holding 10% of its portfolio in cash in December. Fund manager  Duane McAllister says the fund had been worried that the market was going to be in for a spell of volatility. "Some will take the view, 'Let the shareholders manage their cash exposure.…' But in times of volatile markets, we think it's the managers' responsibility to do what they can to minimize volatility," he says. The fund, one of the top performers over the past several years, has fallen 2.1% since Nov. 1.

Having fund managers who do their homework also helps. One hard-hit corner of the muni market was bonds backed by tobacco-tax revenue. With fewer people smoking, that revenue has been declining fast, and many such bonds fell sharply in price after ratings downgrades in November.

At T. Rowe Price Group Inc., the muni-bond group in late 2009 spent roughly two months analyzing tobacco consumption. They felt smoking would decline faster than what was implied by bond prices and sold most of their holdings. There are eight dedicated muni-bond analysts at T. Rowe Price, and "they help keep us out of trouble," says  Charlie Hill, manager of  T. Rowe Price Summit Municipal Intermediate, which is down 2% since Nov. 1.

—Send questions and comments to Mr. Lauricella at tom.lauricella@wsj.com.