If any of the members of our squirrel-hunting party were prone to remorse,  Steven Rinella, our leader and the guy with the shotgun, told us not to be. "Word gets out," he said, meaning among the squirrels, that they're being stalked for hasenpfeffer, or squirrel stew. "But it doesn't stay out for long," he added. "If you create a void they backfill it immediately. You can't impact the population with hunting. There will always be as many as the habitat will support."

In that case, word had apparently gotten out, all without a shot being fired: There wasn't a single squirrel to be found as we traversed the snow-covered fields at Chaseholm Farm in Pine Plains, N.Y., the furry rodents no doubt reproducing madly in anticipation of Mr. Rinella's deadly aim.

We were visiting the farm, owned by friends of Mr. Rinella, a professional hunter and writer whose TV show, "The Wild Within," starts on the Travel Channel Jan. 9, because my family was too conscience-stricken to let us hunt on our property. 

That was a pity. I'm certain had we assembled at our place, 45 minutes north, not only would we have spotted squirrels in abundance, but they'd be bombarding us with the acorns and bark, which Mr. Rinella said isn't atypical squirrel behavior when they feel they have the upper hand. 

So with no squirrels in sight, Mr. Rinella decided to try to rustle up a rabbit, a more traditional component of hasenpfeffer. "You know in Bugs Bunny—'I want my hasenpfeffer,'" he said, referring to a Loony Tunes episode in which Yosemite Sam, working as the king's chef, is ordered to serve up royal rabbit stew. "You thicken it with crumbled up ginger snaps."

  The Thrill of the (Bloodless) Hunt  

I'm not sure whether the hunter, author of "The Scavenger's Guide to Haute Cuisine," was referring to squirrel or hare, or both. But it didn't really matter. We weren't having any luck scaring up rabbit, either: Farley Chase, a friend of Mr. Rinella's and a literary agent whose family has owned the farm since the 1930s, had been dispatched to create a commotion, encouraging any rabbits—we spotted multiple tracks through the snow, as well as one pair belonging to a mink—to run in the opposite direction, where the writer and soon-to-be TV star would be waiting to pick them off and turn them into dinner.

I have nothing against hunting, especially if it's for sustenance. But, honestly, I don't think God intended us to hunt. How do I know? One word: brambles. Also, my socks kept falling down inside my boots. But I take full responsibility for that. I should have worn a pair of thermal socks; if only I'd known they were sitting in my wife's drawer. But that's between us.

In lieu of prey, Mr. Rinella regaled us with hunting stories and impressions, or should I say observations, about his favorite animals. While he said he'd suffer no guilt about bagging a dozen squirrels a day, bears still give him pause. "The thing that bothers me about shooting bears," explained the hunter, who still speaks in the cadences of rural Michigan, where he grew up, even though he lives in Brooklyn these days and counts among his acquaintances the writers  Jay McInerney and  Ian Frazier, "is that every day a bear wakes up he's different than he was the day before. I don't think squirrels are different. I don't think they're processing information. They're hard-wired to bury an acorn."

Mr. Rinella seemed pretty tough to me, but he claims he isn't half as tough as his older brother, Matt. "He's super hard-core. He'll go out nine, 10 days by himself. He never feels pain."

By those standards I probably should have thrown in the towel. My socks were continuing to sink further into my boots. It was only a matter of time until I'd be forced to ask the entire party to stop while I adjusted them.

Even though Mr. Rinella, 36, may not be as stalwart as his sibling, he's still the real thing: When he spots a grizzly somewhere like Yellowstone, he thinks of it more as a pet than a wild animal. "If you see a grizzly in a park it doesn't count," he said. "There's no hunting pressure. The animals are completely different. You can see it from a Winnebago. It's not emblematic of the experience."

If the bears in the wild are half as crafty as our squirrels, I certainly wouldn't want to encounter one. "I'll bet you any amount of money there's a squirrel laying on a branch right now," Mr. Rinella said as we traipsed through the woods chatting, and thus eliminating the element of surprise—a conundrum he said he and his crew faced shooting their TV series. "Any squirrel you run into already knows we're here. We've just got to find one that's not cynical."

Just at that moment, Mr. Chase did—spotting one of the little fellows as it skittered through the top branches of a tree about a hundred feet away. We gave chase. The squirrel, obviously befuddled at suddenly being the center of attention, made the tactical error of trying to flee by running down the tree. 

While I was still catching up, Mr. Rinella took confident aim and dispatched it with a single shot. Then he graciously asked who wanted the trophy for dinner.  Jamie Goldenberg, our photographer, was the first to speak up. 

Mr. Rinalla instructed her to soak it in buttermilk overnight, brown it in flour, and bake it at 350 degrees for 15 minutes. Also, to watch out for embedded projectiles. "Everybody I know has broken teeth on pellets," he said. "It's an occupational hazard." 

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 