Following a recent screening of "Miral," a new film about a young Palestinian woman by the Jewish-American director Julian Schnabel, Dan Rather moderated a panel that included Mr. Schnabel, his girlfriend Rula Jebreal, on whose autobiographical novel the film is based, and several others. As the guests settled into their seats, it became clear that Ms. Jebreal's microphone was malfunctioning. No one could hear her voice. It may only have been a technical glitch, but since this screening was being held in the main hall of the United Nations General Assembly, the moment seemed emblematic.

"Miral," which is being distributed by the Weinstein Co., follows the title character, played by Freida Pinto, as she comes of age amid a reality of war and occupation. Politics intrude on Miral's educational, her first love, and her relationship with her father, but they are hardly the focus of the film. Still, in advance of the U.N. event, some Jewish groups, such as the American Jewish Committee and the Simon Wiesenthal Center—not to mention the nation of Israel—condemned the location of the screening. 

"[Producer] Harvey Weinstein is very generous and pro-Israel, and I'm certain that in the past he's been at our dinners," said Rabbi Marvin Hier, founder and dean of the Wiesenthal Center and an Academy Award-winning producer in his own right. "But the U.N. is a political body with a controversial record on the Middle East." (Messrs. Schnabel and Weinstein said they extended invitations to their critics, but Mr. Hier and a spokesperson for the AJC each insisted they weren't invited to the U.N. event.)

A day after the screening, in the sun-soaked kitchen of Mr. Schnabel's 11th Street palace of a home, Ms. Jebreal laughed about the microphone incident, but acknowledged its symbolism. In fact, she said, it took the presence of Mr. Schnabel—as a partner and a filmmaker of international stature—to amplify her story. "In all of Julian's films, he always gave a voice for the people who are not heard," she said. "He uses his privilege to speak about them, for them."

When she met Mr. Schnabel in 2007, Ms. Jebreal, 37, had already sold the screenplay for "Miral" to an Italian production company. But before she signed off on its version, she asked Mr. Schnabel, the renowned painter who has forged a successful second career in film, to take a look at it. He did, then asked for a copy of her book. Enchanted by its descriptions of Jerusalem, and touched by its depiction of the relationship between Ms. Jebreal and her father, Mr. Schnabel agreed to work on the script. As a Brooklyn-born Jew whose mother had been active in Hadassah, Mr. Schnabel was also troubled by its description of a violent country.

"When I read the book I thought, why are these people villainized? I need to go there, and I need to see for myself what's happening," he said. "And in the process of doing all that, I felt like my mother's wish—that I should go to Israel and see what it was—would be realized."

Before his encounter with Ms. Jebreal, Mr. Schnabel, 59, had never met a Palestinian person. He knew Israel from the prayers he recited as a child ("Next year, in Israel"), and from a brief trip in 1987, just as the intifada began. Ms. Jebreal gave him books by writers like Benny Morris, and films like "Jenin, Jenin" to watch. She often found him crying. In turn, he wanted to know the details of her story.

"I was struck by how sensitive he was, and how he not only understood it, he embraced it," she recalled. "There were things I didn't write that he asked me about. He felt there was a deeper level I didn't touch."

From 2007 through 2008, the pair worked on the script while Ms. Jebreal continued working as a TV journalist in Rome, sending it back and forth over email, and eventually spending ten days in Morocco to finish it. At some point—neither one can pinpoint it—they fell in love. "It was very complicated to be so immersed in what we were doing, and in that place, and I saw everything there through Rula's eyes," said Mr. Schnabel, who at the time was married to his second wife, actress Olatz López Garmendia. "It was her world, and it was impossible to be in two places at once, emotionally. So we just had a very, very intense relationship and..." He paused. "And I guess that's what happened."

On the Jerusalem set of "Miral," which opens Friday in New York, Ms. Jebreal played multiple roles: negotiating access to sensitive sites, like the inside of al-Aqsa mosque, where her father was an imam; assessing a location's faithfulness to reality; and even swimming out to sea to simulate the drowning of her mother's character.

"She was really my guide—I believed her," said Mr. Schnabel. "I also believed I was in certain places that could be dangerous, but I trusted her, and I didn't want the movie to be made by a tourist."

Mr. Weinstein saw the film in London prior to last year's Cannes Film Festival, and immediately made an offer for the North American rights. He said the film is intended to promote a peaceful dialogue. "It is one side's perspective of the conflict," he said, "but that should not be a criticism of it."

Indeed, the film's uneasy reception in the States stands in contrast to the warm welcome the crew received in Israel, according to Jon Kilik, Mr. Schnabel's longtime producer. There, Mr. Kilik said, government officials such as the mayor of Jerusalem, an Israeli production company, and a mostly Israeli crew were supportive, in, for example, making arrangements for filming in sensitive areas or at inopportune times. "They knew this was not without controversy, but they encouraged us to come," Mr. Kilik said. "There's a really interesting irony which is that without the Israeli government, without the help we got everywhere in Israel, we could never have made this movie." 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Julian Schnabel's film "Miral" made its premiere at the 2010 Venice Film Festival, five months after producer Harvey Weinstein saw it for the first time. A previous version of this article incorrectly stated that Mr. Weinstein first saw the film after it had screened at the Cannes and Abu Dhabi film festivals. 