ATHENS—Market expectations that Europe's leaders will agree on a strong and flexible bailout fund to resolve the continent's debt crisis aren't likely to be met, said two senior government officials from within the currency area. 

The proposals to beef up the European Financial Stability Facility, or EFSF, are encountering growing German intransigence after Berlin failed to achieve its own agenda for reforming euro-zone economies, 

In recent meetings, German officials have shown an increasing unwillingness either to strengthen Europe's temporary bailout mechanism or to augment its powers, as Germany is forced to compromise on its own program to revamp European Union budget rules it sees as vital to boosting competitiveness. 

"There will be an agreement because one has to be reached. But I fear that it will not stand up to market expectations, and this could intensify debt problems in the euro zone in the future," said a senior euro-zone government official who is party to the talks. 

"Germany will likely get less than expected in the competitiveness pact so, it will give less as far as the EFSF is concerned. And this is where the problem lies." 

The EFSF, which expires in mid-2013, has been set up for €440 billion ($615 billion), but its effective lending capacity is seen at around €250 billion, in part because of the aspiration to reach a triple-AAA rating for bonds raised by the facility. The EU provides another €60 billion to the current rescue fund. 

To ensure the new, post-2013 rescue mechanism will have €500 billion available in aid if needed, Germany and other states will have to contribute more. 

Euro-zone leaders are due to meet March 11 to discuss Germany's reform proposals in a run-up to a EU-wide summit March 25 that is being billed as a comprehensive response to Europe's debt crisis. 

At those meetings, EU officials will decide on the final size of the EFSF, which was cobbled together last year after Greece's debt crisis threatened the stability of the euro zone. 

In addition to the questions that have been raised about the fund's size, there has been talk that the EFSF would buy bonds of troubled euro-zone economies to ease their stock of outstanding debt. 

"It doesn't look like Berlin will commit to a more flexible EFSF. It still has huge reservations on whether the fund will be able to buy euro-zone government bonds directly in the secondary market, which means there will not be much headway on how to deal with the debt of the countries in the euro-zone periphery," said a second official who is also party to the talks. 

In this week's meeting, European Commission officials are expected to discuss a watered-down version of Germany's proposal, which is also backed by France. 

Among the Franco-German proposals is a provision that would require euro-zone member-states to restrain their debt burdens and deficits through a phased program along the lines of what Germany has already incorporated in its constitution. 

In addition, the Franco-German proposal calls for a uniform corporate tax rate across the currency bloc, a common retirement age of 67 years old across Europe and the abolition of wage indexation in various member states. 

In the upcoming summits, countries that have already received a joint EU and International Monetary Fund bailout—like Greece and Ireland—are also hoping for an extension of the repayment period for their loans and lower interest rates on those loans. 

"The loan-repayment period will be extended from three-and-a-half years to seven years," the second official said. "But an expected cut in interest rates from above 5% to around 4% is far from being agreed." 