FRANKFURT—Economist  Jens Weidmann officially began his term as the youngest-ever president of Germany's central bank, vowing to carry on the rigorous anti-inflation philosophy of his predecessor,  Axel Weber.

Mr. Weidmann, 43 years old, faces a difficult task: He must convince a bailout-weary German public that they have a forceful voice at the European Central Bank without causing the rancor that marred the tenure of Mr. Weber.

"There must be no compromise" on the ECB's inflation objective, Mr. Weidmann said during a festive induction ceremony on Monday that included past Bundesbank presidents Helmut Schlesinger, Karl Otto Pöhl and Ernst Welteke as well as German Finance Minister  Wolfgang Schäuble.

"Short-term emergency measures—when they become a permanent medication—can have significant side effects," said Mr. Weidmann, a former top adviser to German chancellor Angela Merkel.

The ceremony and presence of economic luminaries called to mind the Bundesbank's glory days of the 1970s to 1990s, when the central bank safeguarded Germany's postwar boom with a conservative stance that put price stability above all else.

But Bundesbank presidents, or any of the other 16 national central-bank heads in the euro zone, don't call their own shots anymore. When the ECB's executive board is included, Mr. Weidmann is one of 23 votes on interest rates and other policies. Still, many analysts see the Bundesbank president as second in importance only to the ECB president, given Germany's economic and financial clout in the region.

Mr. Weidmann faces a tough balancing act as he succeeds Mr. Weber, a former professor who delivered his hawkishness with a style that could be abrasive at times and rankled his ECB colleagues. Mr. Weber, who unexpectedly announced his resignation in February and next month starts a teaching stint at University of Chicago, railed against the ECB's purchases of government bonds of its weakest members.

Mr. Weber was once seen as the front-runner to replace Jean-Claude Trichet, who steps down as ECB president on Oct. 31. With Mr. Weber off to Chicago, Italian central banker  Mario Draghi is now seen as the heavy favorite.

Many economists credit the ECB's bond-buying move with keeping the debt problems that began in Greece from turning into another Lehman crisis. But in Germany, economists saw it as a dangerous mingling of fiscal and monetary policy, and the public viewed it as a taxpayer-supported bailout of profligate countries.

Mr. Weber gave a face and a voice to that anger. Addressing Messrs. Trichet and Schäuble at Monday's ceremony, Mr. Weber said: "At times we struggled with one another in light of difficult and far-reaching decisions—not over the common goal, but more over the best way to reach it."

"It is very hard to strike this balance between [German] public opinion and ECB policy making," said  Carsten Brzeski, economist at ING Bank in Brussels. "I would expect Wiedmann to be a team player; his challenge will be to still serve German public opinion."

Mr. Weber called Mr. Weidmann, one of his former economics students, "undoubtedly the right man in the right place."

—Nina Koeppen and Tom Fairless contributed to this article.

 Write to  Brian Blackstone at brian.blackstone@wsj.com 