Sales and prices of Manhattan townhouses picked up last year from a dismal performance the year before, with the strong bounce in the prime townhouse markets on the Upper East Side and Upper West Side, property records show.

Owning a house in Manhattan, often with a private rear yard and fireplaces, amid a forest of tall apartment houses and offices, has always been something of status symbol.

But during the downturn, sales in the always-thin market for townhouses fell a bit faster than co-op and condominium sales. Now they have rebounded faster as well.

Brokers say that there are many more buyers looking at a dwindling supply of townhouses on the market, leading occasionally to multiple bidders on a house. At the same time most prices on individual properties are still lower than the peak prices seen in years past.

`"It may not be at the numbers we were getting 24 months ago," said  Jed Garfield, a broker who specializes in townhouse sales at Leslie J. Garfield & Co., "but there is a real market. There was a time when people kicked the tires and wouldn't bid."

A review of sales of one-to-four-family townhouses show that sales and prices are still down from record levels set a few years ago. But sales on the Upper West Side were the highest ever, and on the Upper East Side were close to records set a few years ago.

On the Upper East Side,  Solomon Asser, an experienced developer, picked up an elegant 1899 row house on East 95th Street near Fifth Avenue for $5.9 million in 2007. He converted what had been 10 tiny apartments back into a single-family home, and then waited for a buyer to come along.



He spent millions of dollars restoring the house. He put Durango marble in the lobby, added a rear extension and fixed up the original fireplace mantels. In 2009, he listed the 16-foot-wide house for $19.8 million. Still it lingered on the market, and he negotiated an extension on his $9 million in mortgages.

A few weeks ago the house finally went into contract for about $14 million to a buyer who works in finance, brokers said. Now Mr. Asser has raised the asking price for a second limestone townhouse he is renovating next door by $500,000 to $22.5 million. The work is nearly complete and Mr. Garfield has the listing.

So far deeds for the sale of 54 one-to-four family Upper East Side homes in 2010 have been filed—close to the record 56 sales in 2007—and additional 2010 deeds may be filed in the weeks ahead. The median price was $7.63 million. That is nearly 4% below the record median price of $7.9 million in 2008.

Yet there were fewer trophy sales last year. The highest sale price last year was $44 million for a Fifth Avenue townhouse to Carlos Slim, the Mexican billionaire. But there were only two sales for at least $20 million in 2010, compared with six citywide in 2007 and eight in 2008.

On the Upper West Side, an analysis by The Wall Street Journal showed that sales had begun to close a bit of the gap with the pricey Upper East Side. There were 28 sales in 2010 on the Upper West Side, the same as in 2007. The median sales price of $5.18 million was the highest yet—nearly 8% above the peak median price in 2008

  Diane Abrams, a broker with Brown Harris Stevens, said that during the boom years, prices of West Side houses didn't rise as much as co-op or condos or houses on the East Side, and were now catching up.

"Townhouse living has gotten more popular and people with kids who need bedrooms don't want to move to the suburbs any more," she said.

Until last year, the $15.75 million sale in 2007 of a townhouse on Riverside Drive by  Jim Rogers, the investor, set a record for the West Side. But last year there were two higher sales, topped by the $19.4 million sale of a renovated house on West 76th Street to  Henry Silverman, the founder of Cedant Corp.

Now there are four West Side listings for more than $20 million.

Across Manhattan, townhouse sales reported so far rose by 50% last year, compared with year before, while co-op and condo sales rebounded by 21%. The figures include only properties listed as one-to-four family houses, and may not include similar buildings listed as apartment buildings in city records.

The median price of a Manhattan townhouse was $3.4 million, a figure that blends the sale of low-priced rental buildings in Washington Heights with gleaming limestone mansions just off Central Park. That represents a gain 25% from 2009, but is still 8% below the peak in 2008.

In some neighborhoods, like Greenwich Village and Harlem, sales remained far below the peak sales during the boom years.

In Harlem and East Harlem sales were up 32% and median prices were up 4% from last year to $975,000. But that is 38.5% below the median price of $1.35 million in 2008, and nearly 45% below the sales pace in 2007.

But even in Harlem, there were signs of a comeback. Last fall,  Ryan Brant, former chief executive of video-game company Take-Two Interactive Software Inc., sold his townhouse on West 144th Street near Convent Avenue in Hamilton Heights for $2 million, the highest priced deal last year in the neighborhood.

Mr. Brant paid $1.85 million for the house in 2005, and renovated it. He pleaded guilty to falsifying business records in 2007, in connection with an investigation into options backdating, and put the house on the market the following spring, asking as much as $3.3 million.

  Brian Phillips, a broker at Prudential Douglas Elliman who listed the property, said that "townhouses are back."

"The townhouse market was hit and it is back in a big way, but it is very price driven," he said.

 Write to  Josh Barbanel at josh.barbanel@wsj.com 