This isn't really going to happen, is it? Barring a last-second resolution— a Flutie-to-Phelan Hail Mary from commissioner Roger Goodell to players association director DeMaurice Smith—the NFL is expected to unplug itself Thursday at midnight, as owners "lock out" the players upon the expiration of the current collective bargaining agreement. Sadly, this is done figuratively, as ESPN would surely televise Woody Johnson padlocking the Meadowlands as a sobbing Mark Sanchez pounds his fists upon the gate and screams, "But I left my rare parakeets and back issues of British FHM in my locker!" 

For the sports fan, an NFL work stoppage is going to require significant life adjustment. The league has blossomed into a 12-month obsession—there really is no off-season, even in early March, when we all should be growing up and getting a life.

 There's the combine and the draft; there's contract and coaching gossip; there's Rex Ryan's weekly inane Super Bowl prediction. The nation is hooked on every morsel. Obviously, it's a perfect moment for the NFL to shut it all down and alienate the planet. 

Will you be able move on? Will you vote with your eyeballs and wallets and turn your attention to other sports? Will you wear your Mark Bavaro jersey to the Tribeca Film Festival and the Brooklyn Flea Market? Or will you simply shiver in the darkness until Sal Paolantonio says it is safe to turn on the TV? 

If you opt to look elsewhere, here's a guide to the non-football sports in New York:

 Knicks: Play basketball, a fast-moving game with no helmets or defense. Have not won a championship since 1793. Check that: 1973. Games are played indoors, at the Fifth Avenue Louis Vuitton store. Two star players with great names: Carmelo Anthony, Amar'e Stoudemire. Both charming and ringless, like LaDainian Tomlinson or Jennifer Aniston. Funky owner, funky Al Davis vibe. Celebrity fans: Spike Lee; Matthew Modine; Chloe Sevigny; that guy from that thing; what's-her-face. 

  Follow Jason Gay on Twitter  

 Nets: Also play basketball, though not as adequately as Knicks. Trying to impress a new hire from Utah. Owned by tall Russian and Beyoncé's husband. Currently abroad in London. May return, or may spend year in Amsterdam just, you know, finding itself.

 St. John's: Might be most entertaining basketball outfit of all. Expected to compete this month in do-or-die NCAA tournament, which is what college football would have, if it wasn't dumb. 

 Rangers: Specialists in entertaining sport of hockey. Game is played on solid ice, with knife shoes and fist fights. Players are cordial, which is unnerving. Loyal fan base, currently playoff caliber. Big games televised on The Rodeo Channel.

 Devils: Hockey team based somewhere in Jersey. Coached by Canadian Gandalf. Very hot lately. That guy in your office with the braided beard and the pet albino python likes them. 

 Islanders: Play west of Bridgehampton. Won titles back in the Atari/"Mork & Mindy" days. Pugnacious enemy of flightless birds. Game tickets come with coupon for free car wash. 

 Yankees: Baseball squadron. Best known as Billy Crystal's favorite source of dramedy material. Also known for lengthy championship history, lavish spending, and shortstop with giant house. Despise Boston, Texas, and several of their own players. 

 Mets: Eating Ramen, sleeping on a friend's couch, bumming Metrocard rides and promising tomorrow that they're definitely going to look for a job. For sale on Craigslist. 

 U.S. Open: Queens-based tennis tournament. Family friendly; world's most overpriced pork tacos. Starts in August, after Mets season ends. 

 Jets: Practicing illegally in Rex Ryan's backyard for new Cinemax series. Don't be a nerd and tell Goodell. 

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 