If this is only a chick flick, then call me a chick. Witty, raunchy and affecting, "Bridesmaids" crosses boundaries by blithely ignoring them. At one moment it's a broad-gauge farce that examines sex from a woman's point of view. (The findings are mixed at best.) At another it's a sophisticated comedy of manners, and class, that pits two bridesmaids against each other for control of the wedding, if not the bride's destiny. Through it all—the free-form conversations, the brilliant set pieces, the preposterous gross-outs, the flawless performances—Kristen Wiig's forlorn maid of honor, Annie, seeks her own destiny with a wrenchingly cockeyed passion.

A woman's point of view is one of the film's great distinctions. The screenplay was written by Ms. Wiig and Annie Mumolo—both women are wise in the ways of improv, as well as TV—and directed with extraordinary finesse by Paul Feig, who created the TV series "Freaks and Geeks." As a man, though, I'd say its greatest distinction is its inclusiveness, and I'm not using that sticky term to be PC. The filmmakers and their producer, Judd Apatow, see the comedy genre as including all sorts of quirks and qualities that make us human—effusiveness, obtuseness, tenderness, fury, delicacy, idiocy, eloquence. Their characters cannot stop talking. A bad thing? No, a great thing, because the talk is so smart. They've staged the best highway sobriety test since "The Man With Two Brains," turned baked goods to the best romantic advantage since "Waitress." And the movie's Mr. Right couldn't be odder, or righter.

The bride, Lillian (Maya Rudolph), is forlorn in her own way. She knows her impending marriage will distance her from Annie, her best friend since childhood. She also knows that her wedding plans are being hijacked by the richest and pushiest of her bridesmaids, the ethereally insufferable Helen (a beautifully measured performance by Rose Byrne).

The Annie-Helen rivalry fuels much of the plot. It starts slowly and slyly at a celebratory party, with rival speeches that keep on going and building and getting funnier. That seems to be the script's organizing principle—first do this, then add that, then top it, then push it a little higher and keep it going as long as there's something to build on. The result isn't organized all that well—a few scenes misfire and the whole thing goes on a bit too long. (The film might have done with less, or with none, of Annie's grotesque English roommates; they're built on nothing but arbitrary notions.) That said, though, the wonder is how often "Bridesmaids" reaches the heights and sustains the altitude.

A sweetly ridiculous riff with a radar speed gun builds on repetition and expectation—how many cars will it take before…? (I can't resist describing some of this delicious stuff, but I'm not going to spoil it with details.) A tennis game turns savage. Belching forth from nowhere, a gastric event grows too ghastly for words. A gathering of bridesmaids on a flight to Vegas out-airplanes "Airplane!" as it rises to pure—and I use the word advisedly—pandemonium. Each bridesmaid has her daft appeal, though none is as genuinely crazed—or outrageously entertaining—as Melissa McCarthy's Megan, a creature of formidable girth and unstoppable id. (Annie's mother is played by the late Jill Clayburgh, an actress and comedienne whose career constituted an anthology of lovely performances.)

At the heart of the film is poor, desperate Annie, who lost the bakery she had opened just as the economy tanked, and has yet to find herself as a fully functioning adult. Her car is a wreck, though it's a Lamborghini compared to her love life, which centers on a smarmy Narcissus who treats her like a consumer product that's both disposable and renewable. (It's a tribute to the filmmakers' verve that they've kept the sex scenes funny—extremely funny—since what we're seeing is sheer self-abasement.) Ms. Wiig's first starring role on the big screen is a sensation; how could it have taken so long? She is wistful but never tearful in the worst of Annie's turmoil, intensely likable without trying to be, unfailingly interesting and, in her big moments—one of which involves a giant cookie—a paragon of antic energy.

Then there's the man behind the radar gun, a cop named Rhodes who's played to perfection by Chris O'Dowd. (It's an inspired piece of casting.) "The cop talks weird," Annie's Porsche-driving lover observes at one point, and so he does. He talks with a pleasing accent: Mr. O'Dowd is Irish. He speaks with gentle humor and unforced wisdom, whether he's citing Annie for dysfunctional tail lights, or confronting her, to her confusion and dismay, with indisputable evidence of her competence. Rhodes doesn't play a huge role in the proceedings, but he's worth citing as evidence of the movie's excellence. Here's a man, written by women, who is both a fantasy figure—this is wedding comedy, after all, not kitchen realism—and a convincingly endearing original. "Bridesmaids" gets at so many things with deceptive ease and startling skill—women's anger, the loneliness of the single life, the marriage trap, the pain of sex along with the joy, but also friendship, sanity and a vision of love.

Spencer Susser's debut feature stars Joseph Gordon-Levitt as a guardian demon who brings life to a bereaved household in what amounts to a long-running home invasion. Mr. Gordon-Levitt is a gifted young actor and a compelling presence in everything he does. In this title role of an outlaw vulgarian, and very likely a nut job, he's constantly in motion, and you can't take your eyes off him. For all of Hesher's extravagances, though—his foul mouth, his wild hair, his runaway libido, his fondness for heavy metal and his penchant for arson—he isn't particularly interesting, not even when he's mentoring T.J., a newly motherless boy played touchingly by Devin Brochu. That's not the actor's fault. The problem lies in the role. Rather than a character rooted in some sort of reality—social, satirical, psychological, take your pick—Hesher is an abstract notion animated by false energy.

Almost 80 years ago the peerless French filmmaker Jean Renoir used a similar notion in "Boudu Saved From Drowning." (It's readily available on DVD, and I wouldn't be surprised if Mr. Susser has seen it.) Michel Simon was the scruffy bum—the protohippie, really—who throws himself into the Seine and is saved by a Good Samaritan, then turns his rescuer's household upside down. But Boudu served Renoir as an instrument of social satire. Hesher serves Mr. Susser, who wrote the screenplay with David Michôd, as not much more than an anxiety-making machine in a movie that otherwise depends on moist clichés (Rainn Wilson's lachrymose widower, T.J.'s puppy love for Natalie Portman's nebbishy loser) and life-affirming gestures (the movie's climax) that feel like borrowings from MTV.

The conspicuous exception to these cold calculations is Madeleine, the indiscriminately loving grandmother played by my ex-wife Piper Laurie. Madeleine seems to be in the early stages of dementia; at one point she isn't sure if she's sitting in the dark. Everything about this old lady is enchantingly vague—the story she tells about baking a cake with a shortening called Fluffo, the basis of her strong bond with Hesher—but nothing needs to be spelled out, for Ms. Laurie turns uncertainty into poetry. Her calculation is to toss the calculator.

According to a screenwriting commonplace—a valid one—big, sprawling novels can be rich sources for screenplays ("The Godfather"), while movies adapted from short stories ("The Swimmer"), run the risk of feeling thin. It may seem perverse to mention a film as deservedly obscure as "The Swimmer" in the context of Will Ferrell's ambitious new vehicle, but extreme examples can be illuminating. In that old Burt Lancaster film, adapted from a John Cheever story, an unhappy suburbanite re-examines his life in the course of swimming home in a succession of neighbor's pools. It's nothing but a device, and far from a good one. Dan Rush adapted "Everything Must Go" from a very short (1,600 words) Raymond Carver story about a man sitting on his lawn surrounded by all the things of his life that he's getting rid of in a yard sale. It's a much better movie, but still based on a single device, and thin and repetitive for the same reason.

Indeed, it's basically a one-man show that's short on conflict. Mr. Ferrell's Nick Halsey is an alcoholic who finds himself jobless and then homeless—his wife has shut him out of their suburban house. Contemplating his life as he sits on his lawn in the midst of his worldly goods, he has almost no one to talk to but his 12-step sponsor, a local cop played by Michael Peña, and a neighborhood kid, Kenny (Christopher Jordan Wallace.) Another neighbor, played by Rebecca Hall, appears only sporadically, and to negligible effect.

It would be nice to report that Mr. Ferrell overcomes these dramatic obstacles. He's a serious actor as well as a fine funnyman. (Check out his performance as a charmingly foolish actor in Woody Allen's "Melinda and Melinda.") But Mr. Rush's film functions, for the most part, in such a narrow emotional range—from sad through mournful to lugubrious, with surprisingly few side trips to anger—that you keep rooting for its star to lighten up, which he eventually does when it's almost too late. From time to time the movie grabs you (though the music keeps repelling you). Taking stock and letting go—of superfluous things, of worn-out love—is a strong theme. But the progression of the script is like Nick's self-help program. We're familiar with the steps.

Judd Apatow has already had huge success as a writer-director as well as a producer in mating crowd-pleasing raunchiness with a generous spirit and genuine feeling. In this hit comedy, the slob hero, played by Seth Rogen, hooks up at a bar with a gorgeous blonde played by Katherine Heigl. A few weeks after their drunken encounter (which is much more plausible than it sounds), she's pregnant and he's dumbfounded. But the movie, which also features Leslie Mann and Paul Rudd, is more than a celebration of slobness. Of all things, it's a paean to family values.

Joseph Gordon-Levitt is Brendan, a teenage detective in Rian Johnson's clever parody of film noir that's set in a contemporary California high school. Mr. Johnson has done his homework, and he applies the lessons of the film-noir genre with a lively appreciation for atmosphere—Steve Yedlin did the elegant cinematography—and for the pleasures of film-culture clash. ("Bugsy Malone" meets "The Big Sleep.") Yet the principle is basically a distancing device—look at us here, but imagine us being somewhere else—and the distance grows as the film rolls on.

When Will Ferrell plays funny, few funnymen are funnier. After a wreck on a Nascar track, Mr. Ferrell's faux-legendary driver flees his car, arms flailing wildly, convinced that he's on fire. He isn't, but the movie is. This mock-epic send-up of the inspirational sports-movie genre, directed by Adam McKay from a script he and Mr. Ferrell wrote, burns with a comic intensity that seems too high to be sustainable. Against all odds, though, the filmmaker and his exuberant cast pull it off, right down to a "Chariots of Fire" climax. The cast includes Sacha Baron Cohen and John C. Reilly.

 Write to  Joe Morgenstern at joe.morgenstern@wsj.com 