GLENDALE, Ariz.—Oregon is the underdog heading into next week's national-title showdown with Auburn. The "little Duckies," as coordinator Nick Aliotti referred to his defense Wednesday, are expected to succumb by about a field goal.

But if you saw Stanford play on Monday, you're probably wondering if Vegas has it backward.

Stanford's 40-12 evisceration of Virginia Tech in the Orange Bowl—hands-down the most impressive performance of the bowl season thus far—raises an old question: How much stock should we put in a conference's performance in the postseason? What does it tell us about how the championship game is going to go?

Actually, quite a bit. If we'd paid closer attention, we might've predicted Texas's upset of Southern California in the 2005 title game. Or Florida's rout of Ohio State in the 2006 championship. (Difficult as it may be to believe now, the Buckeyes—who lost 41-14—were a seven-point favorite.)

Bowl matchups are so difficult to gauge going in, since powerhouse teams from the six major conferences seldom play each other early in the season anymore. Just look at how poorly heavily favored teams generally perform in the postseason.

Full analysis of the five Bowl Championship Series games, including insights from the Journal's Darren Everson and key stats to watch.

But as we move through the bowl season, we get answers. In 2005, an unranked, 8-3 Oklahoma team beat 10-1 Oregon in the Holiday Bowl—a hint that Texas, the Big 12 champion, might be in good shape against defending national champion USC of the Pac-10 in the title game. In 2006, Ohio State was the clear favorite entering the title game as the only undefeated major-conference team. But No. 3 Michigan's two-touchdown loss to USC in the Rose Bowl should've given observers serious doubt about the Big Ten.

Fast-forward to today. No. 4 Stanford is the star of the bowl season so far. Oregon beat Stanford by three touchdowns. The Pac-10 is 2-1 in its bowl games. Auburn's Southeastern Conference is 3-4 in its bowl games.

That Stanford game was one of the most talked-about topics in Glendale Wednesday, as the buildup to Monday's championship began.

"Stanford set the tone for everyone else, especially with how they handled the label of having an explosive offense," said Auburn quarterback Cam Newton.

"They've been playing as well as anyone lately," said linebacker Casey Matthews, the heart of the Oregon defense. "Obviously people are going to say we beat them by 21, but that doesn't necessarily carry over into other games. It's all about matchups."

Indeed: Based strictly on matchups, Oregon still looks like the underdog here. Mr. Newton's size and speed is reminiscent of Ohio State quarterback Terrelle Pryor, who overmatched the Oregon defense in the Buckeyes' Rose Bowl victory last season.

Cam Newton is Pryor 2.0. Mr. Aliotti, the Oregon defensive coordinator, pointed out that the 250-pound Mr. Newton outweighs eight of his defensive starters. "People ask me how I've been sleeping," he said. "I've been sleeping like a baby. Every two hours, I wake up and cry.

"Let's face it: They're good. We know they're good. We're going to have to see what the little Duckies can do to slow this juggernaut down."

But Stanford's performance in the Orange Bowl is a sign that perhaps it's possible, and that the conference's mediocre defensive reputation is misguided. "Obviously seeing Stanford be that dominant is definitely exciting for the Pac-10," Mr. Matthews said. "Hopefully we get a little more respect."

 Write to  Darren Everson at Darren.Everson@wsj.com 