MUMBAI – Tata Steel Ltd. – saddled by the debt it took on to fund its India expansion plans and to buy Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus in 2007--plans to raise about $1 billion through a follow-on share sale, and may file an offer document this week, two people familiar with the matter said Tuesday. 

The money will help the company lower its net debt, which was $10.7 billion on Sept. 30. 

The sale could take place in March, one person told Dow Jones Newswires. But the other person said the "timing of the share sale would depend on market conditions and could be held up by volatile stock markets." 

A Tata Steel spokesman declined to comment. 

Later in the day, Tata Steel said in a filing to the Bombay Stock Exchange that it plans to sell 57 million shares through a follow-on public offering once it gets regulatory approvals. 

It didn't give any details about the size and timing of the issue. 

The company's shares Tuesday ended down 0.5% at INR647.60 in a Mumbai market that closed 0.1% lower. 

A follow-on offer is a sale of shares after a company has already conducted an initial public offering. 

In December, Managing Director  Hemant Nerurkar said Tata Steel wants to bring its debt-equity ratio to 2.5 from the current 2.8, adding that the planned equity offering could cut it to 2.6. 

Tata Steel, the world's seventh-largest steelmaker by capacity, has been working to reduce the GBP3.5 billion debt it took to acquire Corus for $12 billion in 2007. 

Recently, it refinanced GBP3.5 billion of debt, converting term loans to senior debt and expanding its revolving credit facility. 

Apart from the Corus buy, Tata Steel has also raised funds in the past few years to expand production capacity of its only Indian plant in Jamshedpur to 10 million tons a year from 6.8 million tons. 

Tata Steel--which already has plants in Singapore, Thailand, the U.K., South Africa and the Netherlands--plans to build two new factories in India. 

The company received shareholder approval in December to raise long-term resources by selling equity. 

Two people familiar with the matter said on Dec. 24 that the company is planning to raise up to $1 billion though the sale of shares with differential voting rights. 

The plan subsequently stalled because of a lack of investor interest. 

Also in December, Nerurkar said Tata Steel founder Tata Sons Ltd.--which owns 32.69% of the steelmaker--wouldn't like to dilute its holding. 

Instead, Tata Sons may seek to increase its holding in the company by participating in any equity issue, he said. 

 Write to  Bijou George at bijou.george@dowjones.com and Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 