It's shaping up as a season with fewer notes for renowned conductor  James Levine.

In early March, the 67-year-old withdrew from remaining spring concerts with the Boston Symphony Orchestra—and then announced he would resign as its music director in September.

Now it's New York's turn. The Metropolitan Opera announced on Monday that Mr. Levine will withdraw from two upcoming operas: "Das Rheingold" and "Il Trovatore." 

The cancellations, prompted by the advice of Mr. Levine's doctors, will allow him to recover from procedures related to the alleviation of back pain, the Met said in a statement. 

The maestro is not out for the entire season: He will conduct the new production of Wagner's "Die Walküre," opening April 22. Also still on: Berg's "Wozzeck," opening April 6, and two Met Orchestra concerts at Carnegie Hall, on April 10 and May 15.

Choosing what to keep was a matter of balancing health and artistic priorities. 

"It has to do with the importance of the repertory to him," said the Met's general manager,  Peter Gelb.

"Die Walküre" is the second installment of the Met's new Ring cycle, which is a major commitment. And Berg's 20th-century opera was also a must-do. "'Wozzeck' is a work he has championed," said Mr. Gelb. "Those two seemed to be what he wanted to marshal his energy for."

The two operas that were cut will be in veteran hands. 

"Das Rheingold," which Mr. Levine already conducted in the fall, will now be led by principal guest conductor  Fabio Luisi, who was hired a year ago in the wake of Mr. Levine's health issues. He last conducted the full Ring cycle in 2007 and 2008 at the Dresden Staatsoper.

Verdi's "Il Trovatore" was conducted in the fall by  Marco Armiliato, who, as luck would have it, was in town for the current run of "Tosca" at the Met. He will pick up the four remaining performances of "Il Trovatore." (And he is also scheduled to conduct the Met's 2011-12 season opener, Donizetti's " Anna Bolena" on Sept. 26.)

"One of the advantages of having a big repertory is the great reservoir of talent," said Mr. Gelb of the musical bullpen. 

The dates of the operas Mr. Levine will conduct do not allow for one long break, but rather they allow him to conserve energy. "We want him to be healthy and able to conduct," said Mr. Gelb, emphasizing that these changes did not immediately signal more. "He is our music director."