Derek Jeter, future Yankee centerfielder? 

In casual comments to fans Tuesday morning, general manager Brian Cashman raised the possibility that before his new four-year contract expires, the Yankee icon could move from shortstop to center field at nearly 40 years old—a move that would be unprecedented in the history of the game. 

Mr. Cashman opined that he would "be surprised" if Mr. Jeter played out his entire four-year contract at shortstop, and said that a move to the outfield is more likely than a move to third base.

 If he did transition to the outfield, it would be to center field, Cashman said—much like former shortstop Robin Yount did two decades earlier. 

"I like corner outfielders and corner infielders who have power. So for me, if he's ever gonna move, it's probably going to be a Robin Yount situation. But we don't have to deal with it at this point," Mr. Cashman told fans Tuesday morning. "We'll deal with it when we have to."

Mr. Cashman downplayed the remarks in a phone conversation later, calling it little more than ''chit-chat.'' He said that a fan began a line of questioning asking if Mr. Jeter would ever move to third base, prompting his refsponse. 

"I said, not for me. If that ever has to happen, I think his athleticism carries more to the outfield,'' Mr. Cashman said. 

Shortstop is a demanding position, and one of the most important on the diamond defensively. Mr. Jeter's defensive stats took a hit last season, as his range appeared to decrease, and it's unlikely he'll improve as he heads deeper into his late 30's. 

It's exceedingly rare to see a 37-year-old shortstop—only 18 players that age have manned the position for even half a season since 1901. If Mr. Jeter's defense continues to decline, it could damage the Yankees less defensively to play him in center rather than at short. 

But is center field, with its quick jumps and long runs, any easier, and is a switch even possible? Even if, at earliest, Mr. Jeter played center in 2012 at age 38, there is simply no precedent for a player switching to full-time center field at that age. 

In fact, it's rare enough to find natural centerfielders who could even last a half-season in center at age 38. There are just 15 players 38 or older who have played more than 81 games in center, including names like Willie Mays and Ty Cobb. 

There are just four players who played more than 81 games in center field in the past decade —Kenny Lofton, Steve Finley, Devon White and Jim Edmonds. All four were career centerfielders, who in their primes ranked as the best in the game. Among them, they have won an astounding 23 Gold Gloves as centerfielders, often competing with one another for the award. Mr. Jeter lacks such a pedigree.

Mr. Cashman referenced Mr. Yount, a Hall of Famer, as one player who made the switch. But Mr. Yount made the move at age 29—and retired at age 37. 

Retired Met Howard Johnson played some center field as a young player, but established himself as a shortstop and third baseman through his 20s. Then, in his early 30s, he moved to center field—and barely pulled it off. He couldn't imagine Mr. Jeter doing the same in his late 30s.

"At his age, I don't see it," Mr. Johnson said. "Anything's possible. But I went from the infield to the outfield when I was 31, 32 years old—actually 32 years old. I went to center field, and it was one of the toughest things I ever did. There's a lot physically that goes into that. So it's one of those things where if you're going to do it, you have to do it early."

Could Mr. Jeter be the first player to defy history, and make this switch at such an advanced age? Mr. Cashman didn't want to get into it until he has to.

"I don't know," Mr. Cashman said. "This wasn't Yankee policy. This was just a baseball conversation at a breakfast." 