TOKYO—Mizuho Bank's system-wide breakdown, which has led to millions of Japanese being unable to receive salary payments or use automatic teller machines, has affected so many people that Japan's Financial Services Agency, the nation's regulatory watchdog, will have to consider disciplining the lender, a person familiar with the matter said. 

The FSA wasn't immediately available for comment. 

Mizuho, the retail banking unit of Mizuho Financial Group Inc., is now facing its biggest technology crisis in nearly a decade. Demand for cash is surging as fears intensify regarding possible radiation leaks from a nuclear plant damaged by Japan's earthquake. At the same time, most companies are increasing transactions as March 31, the end of the Japanese fiscal year, approaches. 

The system crash, which Mizuho blamed on a surge in deposits following the earthquake, also comes at a time when other banks and industries are struggling to cope with intermittent power outages around the greater Tokyo region. The bank declined to comment on why deposits increased; it is examining what happened.

Most banks have been forced to temporarily shut down some of their ATMs due to blackouts, while others are voluntarily closing them to save power. 

The bank said it aims to fully restore the system after a three-day weekend that runs through the Vernal Equinox Day holiday on Monday, but it remains unclear whether operations will return to normal on Tuesday. 

On Sunday, Mizuho had operational-level talks with its archrivals, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corp. and the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, the core banking unit of  Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group,
MTU


-0.76
%




 over how they could help Mizuho with transaction settlements, in case Mizuho's troubles drag on, another person familiar with the matter said. Underscoring the gravity of the situation, the FSA has asked Mizuho's rivals to help it through this crisis. 

The two lenders are considering shouldering some of Mizuho's load of unprocessed settlements. The banks are looking into how many companies' payments they can handle without overburdening their own systems, the person said. Neither bank was immediately available for comment. 

Mizuho's system failure, which began Tuesday, has affected more than a million cash-transfer orders, worth about ¥830 billion ($10.3 billion) so far. 

About 270,000 transactions that were placed at the bank earlier last week have been processed, but 890,000 transactions, including salary payments, haven't gone through, Mizuho said Sunday.

The bank shut down all of its 38,000 ATMs at its branches and convenience stores on Saturday and will keep them off line through Monday to speed up the system's recovery. Mizuho extended operating hours at its 440 branches during the three-day weekend to serve account holders whose salary payments have been delayed by the system problem, allowing them to withdraw up to ¥100,000. 

Mizuho Bank President  Satoru Nishibori earlier said that the bank is still investigating the locations of the branches where the problems originated and establishing why the transactions failed to go through, but determining the reason will take some time. 

The breakdown is the most serious faced by Mizuho since 2002, when it experienced similar problems that led to delays in processing 2.5 million public-utility payments and other account settlements. 

 Write to  Atsuko Fukase at atsuko.fukase@dowjones.com 