(Please see Corrections & Amplifications item below.)

Doctors Sunday upgraded Rep.  Gabrielle Giffords's medical condition to serious from critical, saying she is doing well without a ventilator and continues to make progress since a gunman shot her eight days ago, the hospital that is treating her said in a written statement.

Ms. Giffords had been breathing on her own for several days before her doctors on Saturday removed the tube from her throat that had linked her to the ventilator. 

In its place, doctors inserted a tracheotomy tube directly into her windpipe, which will continue to protect Ms. Giffords's airway from infections and other complications.

"The Congresswoman continues to do well," the University Medical Center in Tucson, Ariz., said in a written statement.

With the removal of the breathing tube from her throat, doctors may be able to discern if Ms. Giffords is capable of speaking. That would be a major leap in her recovery and prognosis, brain experts have said.

Without any apparent complications from Saturday's procedures, doctors decided to upgrade her condition, the hospital said. On Saturday, doctors inserted a feeding tube to provide Ms. Giffords with more calories, the hospital said.

On Jan. 8, a gunman shot 19 people, including Ms. Giffords, at an event the Arizona Democrat was holding outside a  Safeway supermarket in Tucson. Ms. Giffords was shot in the head; a bullet passed through her brain. Six people died. 

Federal prosecutors have accused 22-year-old  Jared Loughner in the shooting. 

Ms. Giffords is one of three patients from the shooting who remain at the hospital. The other two are listed in good condition, the hospital said. 

—Tammy Audi contributed to this report. 

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 

Corrections & Amplifications

Authorities allege Jared Loughner shot Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and 18 others, six fatally. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said the gunman shot 20 people. One additional person was injured in the shooting but wasn't shot. 