Even trivial pursuits (knocking balls through hoops, tossing horseshoes at stakes) can be more enjoyable with the right tools. Sadly, much of the basic equipment needed to play the simplest games of yore have devolved into toys—the equivalent of a play guitar rather than a true instrument. Investing in quality gear (which generally requires shopping at a store that doesn't also sell coolers the next aisle over) is the easiest way to elevate a pointless pastime into something approaching an actual sport—an activity that depends on skill rather than blind luck (or the whims of the wind). Play these games for real and you'll quickly discover why they've stood the test of time: they're more visceral than a Nintendo Wii, less strenuous than Tae Bo, yet challenging, addictive and brilliantly straightforward. We've put together some high-quality essentials for your next lawn, park or beach party—all made to last for seasons to come, perfect for getting back on your A-game.

—Michael Hsu

 1. Jaques Surrey Croquet Set 

Upgrading from kids' croquet gear to this regulation set is like trading a Wiffle bat for a Louisville Slugger. These mallets have larger heads and longer handles than their toy-store counterparts, allowing for a more controlled hit. Per international regulations, the wickets are narrower than the ones you're probably used to seeing. And in case you need to brush up on the ins and outs of the game, the set comes with an official rule book (Jaques invented—or at least codified—croquet as we know it in 1851). $600, jaquesgames.com  

 2. Dragon Droppings Chain-Mail Footbag 

These chain-mail footbags, made from aluminum rings, are as light as a traditional cloth hacky sack, but they're less stiff (which makes some freestyle tricks easier to pull off) and more durable (you can put them in the washing machine). Each one is made by hand in St. Paul, Minn., and comes with a lifetime repair warranty. Their name, by the way, is the answer to the eternal, burning question: "What would a knight look like after he was eaten by a dragon?" $25, bikiniduck.com 

 3. DWR Teak Pétanque Set 

The object of the French game pétanque—to get your boules closer to a wooden jack than your opponent using any means necessary from 40 to 50 feet away—is simple enough for a child but challenging enough for an adult, with or without drink in hand. The hefty chromed steel balls in this set, a collaboration between a Danish and Japanese designer, come in a teak box that will weather beautifully, even when left out in the elements.$200, dwr.com 

 4. Jaques Challenge Skittles Set 

Long before there were bowling alleys, there were alleyways and skittles sets. The object of this popular British pub game is basically the same as bowling: knock over the pins with a ball. In bowling, the pins are fairly close together. Skittles is more challenging, because the pins are narrower and spaced farther apart in a diamond formation. This set, by the world's oldest game manufacturer, includes nine solid ash skittles, three balls and a canvas case for transporting everything to the alleyway, or recently mowed lawn, of your choice. $180, jaquesgames.com 