Investors in  Stanley Ho's SJM Holdings
SJMHF


-1.69
%




 shouldn't rejoice too much that a family dispute between the gambling tycoon and his heirs over control of his casino empire has been settled. 

That's because we've heard it before. 

The ailing kingpin said on television in January—soon after the family feud burst into the public eye—that "everything is resolved," only for his lawyer to say later that he had been coerced into making the comments. 

Mr. Ho has said and done a lot, including filing and withdrawing two lawsuits against some members of his family and becoming a star on Youtube, since the dispute burst into the open two months ago. 

This latest declaration of peace is more convincing, because it comes from Mr. Ho's longtime aide,  Janet Wong, and has been substantiated by Mr. Ho's lawyer, who also has garnered a fair bit of airtime recently. It was apparently enough to reassure investors, who sent SJM Holdings' shares up more than 8% on Friday. 

But the warring factions failed to offer any details on what has been agreed. 

If shares have been split evenly among Mr. Ho's four families—as Mr. Ho's lawyer had insisted was the tycoon's wish—questions will emerge on who will take the lead in major decisions. If they haven't been divided equally, it remains to be seen how the losing parties will respond. 

These questions won't likely be answered anytime soon, as none of the parties and family members involved appears willing to discuss details of the settlement. 

For the past decade, investors have been worried about how the sprawling Ho family, which consists of 16 surviving children from four different women Mr. Ho calls his wives, would cooperate with one another after the patriarch is out of the picture. 

Mr. Ho said in the latest statement the family will "work together" to further his empire based on "mutual understanding and mutual accommodation." But that's hard to believe after the recent ugly public spat. 

For now, family tensions could recede behind closed doors. Luckily, the company has continued to make money, thanks to a strong management team praised by analysts, and the flood of rich Chinese gamblers to Macau, where gambling revenue surged nearly 60% last year. 

Investors can only hope that Mr. Ho's family members, who pulled out all the stops for the media during the dispute, will put as much effort into ensuring it stays "business as usual" at the casino company.

—Kate O'Keeffe

 Write to  Kate O'Keeffe at kathryn.okeeffe@dowjones.com 