INDIANAPOLIS—Jets coach Rex Ryan gave Brian Schottenheimer, his offensive coordinator, specific instructions before last Sunday's regular-season finale against the Buffalo Bills. Under no circumstances, Mr. Ryan told him, was Mark Sanchez to throw the ball.

So when Mr. Sanchez set up in a shotgun formation as he took the field for his first and only series at New Meadowlands Stadium, Mr. Schottenheimer was caught by surprise. He said he had a mild panic attack. It turned out that Mr. Ryan—what a goofball!—was merely playing a joke on Mr. Schottenheimer, who calmed down once he saw Mr. Sanchez approach the line of scrimmage, take his first snap under center and hand the ball off without incident.

The Jets (11-5) have handled Mr. Sanchez, and his injured throwing shoulder, with great care heading into Saturday night's first-round playoff game against the third-seeded Indianapolis Colts (10-6) at Lucas Oil Stadium. The contest figures to be a huge challenge for the sixth-seeded Jets, whose long-stated goal of seizing the franchise's second championship is suddenly riding on their second-year quarterback's tender right arm.

On Wednesday, Mr. Schottenheimer said Mr. Sanchez took "every meaningful rep" at practice and "showed a lot of zip on the ball." On Thursday, Mr. Ryan said Mr. Sanchez was "zipping the ball around." Are we sensing a trend here? Ever since Mr. Sanchez sustained the injury in the Jets' 22-17 victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers on Dec. 19, the coaching staff has used various iterations of the word "zip" in attempts to quash concerns about Mr. Sanchez's shoulder—a strategy that has been under constant tabloid assault.

The Jets have not disclosed the exact nature of the injury ("sore" has been the only public diagnosis), though neither Mr. Sanchez nor Mr. Ryan has ruled out postseason surgery as a possibility. If nothing else, the Jets have been able to cope with obstacles this season, on the field and off.

And yet the concerns and questions have lingered despite Mr. Sanchez's renowned "zip" and a strong effort against the Chicago Bears on Dec. 26, when he completed 24 of 37 passes for 269 yards. It was one of his finest performances of the season, though he was grimacing in the locker room afterward. Mr. Ryan essentially gave him the day off against the Bills; Mr. Sanchez handed the ball off eight times without attempting a pass.

"It's not really affecting much," Mr. Sanchez said Wednesday when he was asked if his shoulder was hindering him at all. "We're just being smart about it, taking the right routes, giving the right throws and approaching it the same way we have the last couple of weeks."

One cause for optimism, at least as far as the Jets are concerned, is Mr. Sanchez's experience at Lucas Oil Stadium, where crowd noise can be a nuisance for opposing quarterbacks. Mr. Sanchez played there twice last season, as a rookie, and generally performed well. He completed 12 of 19 passes for 106 yards in 106 yards in the penultimate game of the regular season, a 29-15 Jets victory. The two teams met up again, of course, in the AFC Championship Game, which the Colts won, 30-17. Mr. Sanchez was 17 of 30 for 257 yards with two touchdowns and an interception.

"That's a tough feeling, going home after a playoff game," Mr. Sanchez said.

During last season's three-game postseason run, he completed 60.3% of his passes for 539 yards with four touchdowns and two interceptions. His strong play only heightened expectations heading into this season, though Mr. Ryan clearly acted as a facilitator. He has been pumping the Jets' Super Bowl prospects since August, only seldom allowing that Mr. Sanchez is inexperienced and prone to the occasional mistake. Mr. Ryan even likened the Jets to the Yankees this week, citing them as two teams everyone loves to hate. ("We're short about 26 championships," Mr. Ryan said.)

So there is pressure on Mr. Sanchez, not that he would ever admit that. Running back LaDainian Tomlinson and linebacker Jason Taylor, two veterans whom the Jets acquired over the offseason, want to reach their first Super Bowl, both men claiming this elusive goal as one of the reasons they joined the team. They want to win, and win now, because they recognize their careers are drawing to conclusions, sooner rather than later.

"If that doesn't get you excited to play for other guys on your team and to play for yourself and to play for Rex, I don't know what does," Mr. Sanchez said.

Based on his regular-season totals, Mr. Sanchez showed obvious improvement from his rookie year. He threw for 817 more yards, completed five more touchdown passes, finished with seven fewer interceptions and boosted his quarterback rating from 63 to 75.3.

Tonight will be his 34th career start, his fourth in the playoffs. But if he needs a reminder of his place in the quarterback pecking order, all he has to do is glance across the field. Peyton Manning, the Colts' iconic star, will be making his 226th career start, his 19th in the playoffs. Mr. Manning has a 5-1 record against defenses led by Mr. Ryan—though Mr. Manning sat out the second half of last season's loss, the Colts already having qualified for the playoffs.

"I'm not the only coordinator or person that Peyton has ever destroyed," Mr. Ryan said. "I think it's written that I'm his punching bag. Well, at least mine has some arms on it.…I plan on swinging back."

One advantage for Messrs. Ryan and Sanchez is the Jets' ground game. Behind Mr. Tomlinson and fellow running back Shonn Greene, the Jets ranked fourth in the NFL rushing this season, averaging 148.4 yards per game. The Colts, on the other hand, ranked 29th, averaging 92.7 yards per game. Mr. Ryan said he plans to give both of his backs plenty of carries with the goal of controlling the clock and keeping Mr. Manning off the field. Mr. Ryan also wants to lessen the burden on Mr. Sanchez.

"I feel like this game is a lot bigger than me," Mr. Sanchez said. "It's for our team."

He was reflective this week. Last season seemed to take forever to play out, he said. Every game was a challenge, his introduction to the NFL more daunting than he imagined. But this season, he said, has been a totally different experience. He has grown more accustomed to the rapid rhythms of life in the NFL, the wins and losses, the ups and downs, each snap bleeding into the next.

Now, he said, he just wants the postseason to last as long as possible, lest it zip on by.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 