The Defense Department plans a new round of military tribunals at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as the Obama administration tries to accommodate the latest set of congressional restrictions on handling detainees there.

The move points to the dilemma faced by the administration, which must defend holding the trials at Guantanamo despite the White House view that the facility serves as recruitment tool for terrorists and should be shut down.

President Barack Obama recently reasserted his desire to close the prison, in line with an executive order he issued on his second day in office. But administration officials acknowledged the decision to hold new trials there reflected the reality that the president would likely run for re-election in 2012 having still not accomplished that goal.

On Thursday, U.S. officials said Defense Secretary Robert Gates was expected to soon approve the start of military court proceedings against Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, who is accused of four bombings, including the 2000 attack on the USS Cole in Yemen.

The tribunals under the Obama administration were originally announced in November 2009 at a time the administration still held out hopes for opening a new federal prison in Illinois to hold military trials. 

In December, Congress passed a defense-spending bill that contained new curbs on moving prisoners to the U.S. from Guantanamo for any trials. Mr. Obama protested the curbs but signed the bill.

Attorney General Eric Holder announced the military trials for Mr. Nashiri and the four others at the same time he announced civilian criminal trials in New York City for Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and other alleged plotters of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. The plans for civilian trials ground to a halt early in 2010 after a backlash from New Yorkers and members of Congress over security concerns and other issues.

The administration had hoped that the progress of existing cases would revive support for the policy of prosecuting accused terrorists in both civilian and military courts. But in November, a civilian jury in New York rejected all but one of the 285 counts against Ahmed Ghailani, a former Guantanamo detainee charged with aiding the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in east Africa. 

While Mr. Ghailani still likely faces a life sentence in that case, the conviction on only one count was a major setback to the Obama administration's promotion of civilian trials as an option for detainees.

Some 173 prisoners remain at Guantanamo. The administration wants to put some on trial and send others to third countries, and it also wants to detain dozens indefinitely without trial.

Prosecuting accused terrorists at Guantanamo military tribunals doesn't necessarily produce long sentences. In October, Omar Khadr, a Canadian captured when he was 15 years old, pleaded guilty in military court to planting roadside bombs and throwing a grenade that killed a U.S. soldier in Afghanistan. He received an eight-year sentence under a plea agreement, and the U.S. agreed to support his repatriation to Canada after one additional year at Guantanamo.

The administration's plans to move ahead with new military tribunals were earlier reported by the New York Times.

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 