There is something Scandinavian, or even Swiss, about Antwerp. Luxuriantly hip and oddly austere, it seems like a distant cousin to the larger, messier cities of Amsterdam, London and Paris, only a few hours away by high-speed train, and in some other family entirely from ramshackle Brussels, which you could probably walk to in less than a day. 

The hard facts of history and geography, which stipulate that Antwerp is Belgium's second-largest city, get wobblier as the country approaches 300 days without a government. Walking through the center of town, which can seem entirely given over to clothing boutiques and boutique chocolatiers, I wondered where to look for evidence of national decline, and went instead to a symbol of Flanders' regional prowess, the city's thriving Toneelhuis theater, across the street from the local branch of Louis Vuitton.

Once known for its fashion designers, Antwerp is now also known for its theater directors. Founded by Luk Perceval, who currently oversees Hamburg's prestigious Thalia Theater, the Toneelhuis these days is run by Guy Cassiers, the son, as it happens, of a famous postwar Flemish comedian. When Mr. Cassiers isn't bringing his Antwerp productions to places like New York's Brooklyn Academy of Music or directing the new Ring cycle at La Scala, he is here working with his multimedia, multicultural team, who likes to turn classic works of literature into uncanny works of contemporary theater. 

How has Belgium's state of affairs affected the state of his theater? "Not at all," he says. The political crisis, he says, "is not a problem for us as a company—it's a problem for the country." Current events aren't directly the stuff of Mr. Cassiers's work. "Theater is a slow medium," he says. "There are other media that are faster."

This fall, Mr. Cassiers will take up what could be called Belgium's national public memory, when he stages an adaptation of Joseph Conrad's novella, "Heart of Darkness," inspired by Conrad's experiences in the Congo Free State at the end of the 19th century. 

"Heart of Darkness" is "known" in Belgium, says Mr. Cassiers, but "it's not known that it's our history." The novella tells the story of an English captain named Charles Marlow, who, on an African mission for a Belgian trading company, serves witness to the deeds of a demonic ivory trader named Kurtz. The story conjures up images of atrocities associated with Belgian-controlled slave labor. However, Mr. Cassiers doesn't plan to use any of these images in his production. "The only image," he says, will be of his lead actor "playing all the characters." Kurtz, he explains, "is Marlow."

As it turns out, Mr. Cassiers himself played more than one role when he was a graphic design student at Antwerp's Royal Academy of Fine Arts, where he was only a few years behind the famous Antwerp Six, the group of fashion designers who put the city on the map. "I was on the catwalk," he says, of the school's landmark fashion shows in the early 1980s.

"We threw parties," he says. Those parties were a blending of fashion students' costumes and his sets, he says—and "a first step towards making theater."

"I'm from Brussels," says Karen Van Godtsenhoven, the young curator at MoMu, Antwerp's fashion museum. As her surname suggests, her native language is Flemish—spoken, she admits, with "a bit of a French accent." 

She is busy putting together the museum's new show about the history of knitwear—perfectly titled "Unravel"—which opens on March 16. But I'm curious about her own recent experiences, caught between the opposing knots of Belgian identity.

"I thought it would be nonexistent," she says, of what has turned out to be her linguistic problem since she moved here a few years ago. Her slight French accent, she says, means that she is actually considered a foreigner, paired at parties with true foreigners who don't speak Flemish at all. "Antwerp is a port city," she says, but the spirit is that of a more closed kind of place. "You're either from inside the city," she says, "or from outside it."

Long ago, Antwerp was ahead of its time. In its golden age, in the 16th century, it preceded Amsterdam and London as the modern world's first great financial capital. These days it seems to be pioneering a kind of post-modern take on a pre-modern phenomenon—the small city-state, whose style and language surround and separate it, like a moat. 

Looking for traces of that golden age, I wandered into the Plantin-Moretus Museum, which commemorates Antwerp's other 16th-century duty, as a publishing capital. Now a preserve of pure Flemishness, Antwerp was once a polyglot's paradise. The museum's five tons of early-modern type were capable of printing books in everything from Dutch to Aramaic.

No sensible Belgian would speak French here now, but back in the days of Antwerp's heroic French printer, Christophe Plantin (1520-89), people in this building changed languages as often as fashion students now change their clothes.

 --Next week,  Sam Leith in London. 