The messy espionage investigation at Renault SA has become a cautionary tale for U.S. companies under pressure from regulators to aggressively pursue anonymous tips from whistleblowers.

Among the lessons imparted: Don't rush through internal investigations, and don't be afraid to hire independent lawyers to help.

"Renault is the poster child for why you want to approach these situations with a sense of balance, and not have people rush to judgment," said  Robert Fatovic, the chief legal officer at  Ryder System Inc.,
R


-0.86
%




 the Miami-based transportation and logistics provider.

The saga concerning the French car maker began last August, when several top Renault managers received an anonymous tip accusing a senior Renault executive of negotiating a bribe.

After a four-month investigation, Renault in January dismissed the executive and two other managers. The employees professed their innocence, but the company's chief executive,  Carlos Ghosn, said publicly that the company had evidence against them.

Over the past two months, however, Renault has uncovered no evidence against the trio. 

Earlier this month, the company's chief operating officer,  Patrick Pélata, said the company may have been "tricked" into bringing the allegations. On Friday, French police took in for questioning two employees from Renault's security department who were overseeing the auto maker's internal corporate-espionage probe, people familiar with the matter said. Renault is now preparing to exonerate the three managers for lack of evidence. 

The embarrassing episode has served as a wake-up call for U.S. lawyers and corporate-compliance officers and will intensify corporate America's scrutiny of how it handles anonymous tips from whistleblowers, some experts suggested.

"More U.S. companies will take a closer look at their internal investigation and compliance systems," predicted  Michael Brozzetti, CEO of Boundless LLC, an internal auditing and risk-advisory firm in Philadelphia.

Over the past decade, corporate America has paid an increasing amount of attention to corporate whistleblowers.

The Sarbanes-Oxley law, passed in 2002, required publicly held companies for the first time to set up processes to deal with many types of whistleblowers. Congress last year passed the Dodd-Frank law, which provides financial incentives for employees to blow the whistle on securities fraud and other wrongdoing. And in recent years, employers and others have received millions of dollars in rewards for calling attention to fraud committed against the U.S. government.

"Companies these days take whistleblowers extremely seriously," said  Kevin Abikoff, the head of the anticorruption and internal investigations practice group at Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP in New York. Partly because of changes to the laws, "corporate whistleblowing has gone from seeming inappropriate and unseemly to heroic and possibly very lucrative," he said.

Some lawyers and other governance experts say that, in some circumstances, the pendulum can swing too far. "Companies are getting paranoid," said  Steven Pearlman, an employment lawyer with Seyfarth Shaw LLP in Chicago. "It's great that Renault took the allegations as seriously as it did, but you've got to approach allegations like that with a real sense of balance."

Mr. Pearlman said he recently had a client who received an anonymous tip on some alleged wrongdoing and wanted to act before the investigation was done. "I told them, 'You've got to take a deep breath, don't overreact,' " he recalled.

Many experts think that the risks of acting too quickly outweigh the risks to foot-dragging. "By ending an investigation prematurely, you run the risk of a frivolous issue going public too soon," said Ryder's Mr. Fatovic. "The stock gets hit, you invite shareholder lawsuits, you put out more disclosures. It's a tripwire."

  Kathleen Edmond, the chief ethics officer at  Best Buy Co.
BBY


-0.32
%




, largely agrees. She said the company is currently investigating allegations of financial fraud among one of its employees overseas, and that due to the nature of the allegations, the company can afford to be thorough. "It's not like we're dealing with ongoing environmental damage or that the safety of our workers is in jeopardy," she explained.

At the same time, Ms. Edmond noted that following up on a whistleblower tip is often more art than science. "When do you keep going and when do you pull the plug [on an investigation]?" she asked. "It's very hard to know a lot of the time."

According to  Edwin Stier, a partner at Thacher Associates LLC in Skillman, N.J., Renault's botched probe "is a reminder to do it the right way"—such as using an outside law firm that never advised a company's board or executives.

Mr. Stier emphasized that, among other things, a board's outside law firm must create strict investigatory standards at the outset. "Internal audit departments don't have the experience and training to put an investigation together that will withstand attacks in [subsequent] litigation."

Other experts see little U.S. fallout from the Renault situation. At the most, board members' "antennae will go up. They'll say to somebody like me, 'You better get it right,"' said  R. William Ide, a partner at McKenna Long & Aldridge LLP in Atlanta. He conducts independent investigations of business misdeeds on behalf of corporate boards.

 Write to  Ashby Jones at ashby.jones@wsj.com and Joann S. Lublin at joann.lublin@wsj.com 