

SEOUL—Samsung Electronics Co., the world's biggest producer of memory chips and flat-screen televisions by revenue, said Thursday it acquired Dutch display technology firm Liquavista BV for an undisclosed sum last month, the latest move by the Korean technology giant into next-generation displays for mobile devices. 

The deal shows that Samsung is attempting to grab a bigger share of the fast growing e-reader market, largely dominated by the likes of Apple Inc.'s iPad and Amazon.com Inc.'s Kindle e-book reader. It also highlights Samsung's strategy of moving away from organic growth to pursuing acquisitions and expanding into new segments.

Last month, Samsung agreed to buy a majority stake in South Korean medical-equipment-maker Medison, in a deal reportedly worth more than 300 billion won ($269 million). In 2008, Samsung attempted to buy U.S. flash-memory-card maker  SanDisk Corp.
SNDK


-0.79
%




 for $5.85 billion, but withdrew its bid due to pricing. That same year, Samsung acquired the intellectual-property assets of U.S.-based Clairvoyante Inc., an IP-licensing company responsible for the development of subpixel-rendering display technology. 

Samsung said in a statement that Liquavista will help expand its position in next-generation display technologies such as transparent displays and e-paper.

Liquavista, spun out of Philips Research Labs in 2006, offers a type of electronic display technology known as electrowetting, which is used in e-readers, mobile phones, media players and other mobile devices. The company is backed by several investors including Amadeus Capital and semiconductor-equipment maker Applied Materials Inc. of the U.S. Liquavista declined to comment on the deal. 

"In e-paper applications, the response time of electrowetting displays will be more than 70 times faster than that of existing reflective displays, allowing for color videos, which was previously thought impossible," Samsung said in a statement. "As electrowetting can be manufactured by modifying existing liquid-crystal-display production lines, Samsung will be able to realize significant synergies through the utilization of existing manufacturing equipment and capabilities."

Samsung said displays using electrowetting consume just 10% of the battery power of existing display technologies. 

Earlier this month Samsung Group, parent of Samsung Electronics parent, said it plans to spend a record 43.1 trillion won (US$38.3 billion) this year, part of it to expand in displays. 

At the end of September, Samsung Electronics had cash of around $19.4 billion.