 UBS will hire staff faster in Asia than elsewhere, CEO Grübel says, predicting the region could benefit in the long run from taking a less stringent stance on bank capital and compensation than Europe and U.S. in the aftermath of the financial crisis.  

 Citigroup swung to a fourth-quarter profit as lending strengthened outside the U.S., but the result was weaker than investors had expected.  

 China urged the U.S. to open its market further to Chinese investments, saying Washington should reduce restrictions on foreign investments due to national-security concerns.  

 The IEA said the world will need more crude from OPEC nations amid faster-than-expected oil demand growth, or risk high prices that damage the recovery.  

 Boeing again pushed back deliveries of its new 787 Dreamliner, this time to the third quarter. Rival Airbus is raising the average price of its aircraft by 4.4% to offset higher costs.  

 Steve Jobs's latest medical leave renews questions about the depth of Apple's executive bench. The company's shares were down 3.4% midday in New York.  

 Japan's new cabinet is emphasizing its commitment to raising the consumption tax in a bid to restore the nation's finances.  

 U.S. Fed officials are struggling to find a coherent way to explain their $600 billion bond-buying plan and other touchy issues to the public.  

 Li Ning will invest $10 million and boost its marketing in the U.S. this year as the Chinese sports-apparel maker attempts to become a global brand.  

 China Investment Corp. chose Toronto for its first foreign office in a move that highlights Canada's relative openness to Chinese investment.  

 Lenovo will form a new business unit focused on mobile Internet and "digital home" devices, continuing its push beyond PCs.  

 Hana Financial allied itself with China Merchants Bank following efforts by Korean rivals to boost ties with Chinese lenders.  

 China was a net seller of U.S. Treasury debt in November, but it remained the biggest foreign holder of the securities.  

 India's Infosys will appeal an order from income tax authorities seeking more than $88 million in taxes for software sales made at the overseas premises of its international clients.  

 Burberry's sales rose 27% in the third quarter, helped by growing retail sales in China.  

 Obama said he plans a government-wide review of U.S. regulations, aiming to eliminate rules that stymie economic growth.  

A suicide bomber blew himself up in a crowd of police recruits in the Iraqi city of Tikrit, killing at least 52 people and injuring 150.

 Hong Kong's government said it is "striving" to pass legislation allowing it to comply with U.N. sanctions against Iran.  

 Australia's government said it is forming a business task force to help marshal reconstruction as the estimated cost of flooding in Queensland reached $20 billion.  

 Taiwan's military missed nearly one-third of its targets with missiles fired during an air-defense drill, raising concerns about its defense capabilities.  

Pakistani forces rounded up dozens of men in the Orangi Town neighborhood of Karachi, part of a crackdown on soaring violence.