MUMBAI -- Detergent and insect-repellent maker Jyothy Laboratories has purchased Henkel AG's 50.97% stake in its Indian unit for 1.19 billion rupees ($26.4 million). 

The deal "will help us in strengthening our position in urban India," said M. P. Ramachandran, chairman and managing director of Jyothy Labs. "It will also give us access to any new product launches of Henkel AG in the future."

Henkel AG, the maker of Pril, Mr White and Henko, however, has the option of returning to India's fast-growing 450 billion rupees personal-care segment through a primary or secondary purchase of as much as 26% stake in Jyothi Labs after five years, according to the terms of the purchase.

With this acquisition, Jyothi Labs, the maker of fabric whitener Ujala Supreme and insects repellent Maxo, will double its sales to 12 billion rupees ($267 million) and extend its presence into the premium categories.

It will also have access to Henkel AG's global brands and research and development. Henkel India does not sell all brands of Henkel AG.

Mumbai-based Jyothy Labs will pay 20 rupees (44 cents) a share to buy 59.3 million shares in Henkel India. 

"Along with the cost of open offer, debt and preference shares, overall, Jyothy Labs' acquisition cost will be around 8.18 billion rupees ($181 million), which is little less than two times the company's turnover," said a person involved in the transaction who declined to be named.

Jyothy Labs started its bid at 10 rupees a share, but doubled its initial offer, he said. 

The deal could prove synergistic for Jyothy Labs as both the companies have similar product lines, said Bhaumik Bhatia, an analyst with IDBI Capital Market Services Ltd.

"While Henkel predominantly caters to the urban distribution centers, Jyothy is targeted more at the mid-market and economy segment," he said.

Henkel has a 1.3% market share in the 120 billion rupees detergents category, according to market researcher Nielsen Co.

However, large multinationals such as Procter and Gamble, maker of Ariel and Tide, and Unilever Plc, maker of Surf and Wheel, make this a highly competitive segment. 

Some of Jyothy's and Henkel's divisions have high penetration -- like soaps, packaged tea, washing powder and detergent cakes -- and sluggish growth, according to a Standard Chartered Bank report released in January.

Challenges for Jyothy Labs include turning the new combined entity value accretive in a highly competitive market, said Anand Mour, an analyst at Indiabulls Securities Ltd.

On Thursday, Jyothy Labs' shares closed at 222.05 rupees a piece on the Bombay Stock Exchange on Thursday, while Henkel India's share price was at 35.55 rupees a piece.

The price at which Jyothy Labs is acquiring Henkel India's stake is 42.8% lower than the price it had paid in March to acquire Tamilnadu Petroproducts Ltd's 14.9% stake in Henkel for 607.30 million rupees.

With this acquisition, Jyothy Labs will have a 65.87% stake in Henkel India. It will have to make an open offer to acquire an additional 20% in Henkel India as required by the guidelines of India's capital market regulator.

While the acquisition will be financed through cash, Jyothy Labs will refinance the debt on Henkel India's book by taking a 6-billion-rupee loan from Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. 

Henkel India owes about 4.54 billion rupees to lenders, according to a company release.

For the quarter ended March 31, it posted a loss of 183.30 million rupees on sales of 1.19 billion rupees. 

Jyothy Labs will purchase 68 million preference shares in Henkel India from Henkel AG for 439 million rupees, subject to regulatory approvals, the company said.

Jyothy Lab had raised 2.28 billion rupees through qualified institutional placements in August last year to pay for acquisitions. It will look at selling off some stake in the holding company to private equity investors in a couple of months, the person quoted earlier said.

MAPE Advisory Group Pvt. Ltd. advised Jyothy Labs. HSBC Securities and Capital Markets (India) Pvt. Ltd., HSBC Trinkaus and Burkhardt AG are the advisers to Henkel AG on this transaction.

.