BANGALORE –  General Electric Co.
GE


0.19
%




 said Thursday it expects its health care business revenue from India to grow 25% in 2011 and that it will invest $50 million in the country over the next three years to develop new products. 

GE Healthcare is coming up with products targeted at emerging markets such as India and China, which are spending more on medical equipment. By developing products aimed at lowering costs, increasing access and improving quality, the company aims to benefit from the increasing health-care penetration in these key markets. 

Revenue from India this year is likely to rise to about $400 million from $320 million in 2010,  John Dineen, president and chief executive of the U.S-based conglomerate's health care unit, told reporters. Revenue may grow 30% compounded annually through 2015, he said. 

"In India and China, you see health care being pushed into the rural areas. So you've got large sophisticated hospitals and smaller clinics [in urban areas] and ultimately the rural clinics," Mr. Dineen said. 

He expects revenue growth in India to come from the sale of its products across this spectrum. 

Mr. Dineen said the company expects to add 1,000 engineers in India over the next two years. 

GE Healthcare's India operations currently employ about 1,200 engineers. 

"We'll continue to make huge investments in our engineering capabilities here in India. And I think that's a virtual guarantee that you'll see more manufacturing [from India] in the future as well," Mr. Dineen said. 

GE Healthcare currently has seven manufacturing facilities in India. 

  Omar Ishrak, president and chief executive officer of GE Healthcare Systems, said the company plans to launch 9-10 new diagnostic products in India over the next three years. 

GE Healthcare Thursday launched an electrocardiogram device and a cardiac ultrasound device that were made in India keeping in mind local requirements. The company has so far launched 11 such products from India, for use in India and the world, it said in a statement. 

While the bulk of GE's health care sales come from medical imaging equipment, such as Computed Tomography and Magnetic Resonance Imaging scanners and ultrasound equipment, it is aiming to diversify into areas such as life sciences and molecular diagnostics. 

The company had previously said it expects its health care revenue in China to grow at a 20% compounded annual clip through 2015, from about $900 million in 2009. 

 Write to  Rumman Ahmed at rumman.ahmed@dowjones.com and Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com 