The faltering popularity of compact discs is claiming an unexpected casualty: a Manhattan-based nonprofit that funds free concerts with the pennies it receives from individual CD sales.

The Music Performance Fund has contributed support to thousands of performances, including the Metropolitan Opera in Central Park and Broadway on Broadway. But fund trustee John Hall said the ascent of music downloads has meant a big hit to its coffers. 

"If we don't get some core money, we will be out of business," Mr. Hall said. 

 The fund was created in 1948 during the settlement of a musicians' strike. As part of the contract between the American Federation of Musicians and some record labels, including Sony Music, Universal Music Group and Warner Brothers Records, the fund now receives a tiny portion of every CD or vinyl record the companies sell. 

The last contract between the union and labels dates to 2005. It was extended in 2008 for another three years, according to AFM President Ray Hair, and does not include any provisions to steer revenue from downloaded music to the fund. Negotiations between the union and record companies are going on now. The fund does not participate in the talks.

Bernard Plum, a partner at Proskauer Rose, which represents the labels, said negotiations—which cover a range of issues, including wages—are in the preliminary stage. "It's one issue in a very complex negotiation, and I don't really know how that's going to come out at this point," Mr. Plum said. "It's way too soon to tell."

Mr. Hair declined to comment on the specifics of negotiations. He said he hopes the fund survives. "I don't think there's another organization whose sole purpose is to produce free concerts of a professional nature to the public," he said. 

Sales of CD's, cassettes and LP's have plummeted from more than $780 million in 2000 to about $212 million in 2010, according to the Recording Industry Association of America.

"Sales of physical product, they've all but disappeared," said Samuel Craig, director of the Entertainment, Media and Technology program at NYU Stern. "If you look at the younger generation...the thought of buying a CD seems so retro and so ancient, they're not going to do it."

Mr. Hall, a former opera singer and the retired chief executive of the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, said the fund laid off six employees in December. 

The nonprofit lost more than $1 million in 2010 and dipped into a dwindling reserve fund to cover its $5.9 million budget, according to financial records reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. MPF helped sponsor 4,408 concerts in the U.S. and Canada in 2010, a 60% drop from 2005 and more than a 93% decrease since 1982, according to the same records. 

Last summer, the group pulled its support from the Met performances in Central Park, which Mr. Hall said cost the fund between $100,000 and $125,000 a season. The Met's park performances cost several million dollars a year before they were scaled back for reasons unrelated to the loss of the music fund grant, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Vincent La Selva, artistic and music director of the New York Grand Opera Company, said the music fund has covered the cost of its performances in Central Park for 38 years. Without the $25,000 annual grant, the program will close, he said. 

—Erica Orden contributed to this article.