FRANKFURT—Rising prices for food, energy and other commodities could drive up consumer prices in the euro zone and there is "significant uncertainty" as to whether food supply will be able to meet demand in the long run, the European Central Bank cautioned Thursday.

Separately, consumer confidence in the 17 countries that use the euro continued to weaken in January, reflecting concerns about the economic outlook and the jobs market. 

The ECB said in its monthly bulletin that it is "essential" to monitor the development and drivers of food commodity prices, which have risen significantly. Wheat prices were 91% higher at the end of 2010 than at the beginning of the year, while prices for maize, soybeans and sugar were also sharply higher. 

"There will remain upside pressure on food prices in the long run, due to robustly growing global demand," the ECB said in a research article on commodity food prices. "While there is scope for supply-side effects to match the rise in demand, there remains significant uncertainty about the extent and pace of the ability of supply to meet the expected rise in demand and thereby help to limit the rise in food prices." 

The ECB observed that "recent cuts in production estimates and signs of record imports by China put upward pressure on [maize] prices," which were 57% higher at the end of 2010 than at the beginning. 

Crude oil prices surged about 20% over the past 12 months and the ECB reiterated that the supply-side response to higher prices and demand has been "muted." 

"A substantial inventory drawdown ... may hint at tighter market conditions in the near future," it said. 

The ECB also warned that "survey indicators up to December signal rising price pressures" in industrial producer prices, pointing to recent purchasing managers' surveys of input and output prices. "The increases in the output price indices indicate that input cost increases from higher raw material and commodity prices are, to some extent, being passed on to customers." 

The warning comes after rising energy prices pushed euro-zone inflation above the ECB's 2% ceiling in December 2010, when consumer prices were up 2.2% from December 2009. 

The ECB reiterated that the region's inflation rate could increase further in the coming months, before moderating again toward year-end. Over the medium term, prices should move in line with the ECB's objective of keeping the annual inflation rate just below 2%, it said. 

"A very close monitoring of price developments is warranted" because price pressure could gradually build, it warned. "Risks to the medium-term outlook for price developments are still broadly balanced, but could move to the upside." 

"The increase in anxiety at the ECB over upside risks to inflation is again evident," said  Kenneth Wattret, chief euro-zone market economist at BNP Paribas. "Pivotal to the ECB's assessment will be whether the current short-term problem of above-target inflation turns into a more persistent problem via 'second-round' effects on labor costs, which then push up core inflation." The ECB said in its bulletin that latest labor cost indicators show "subdued wage pressures." 

The European Commission Thursday said its measure of consumer sentiment in the euro zone fell to minus 11.4 from minus 11 in December, the second straight monthly decline. 

In its preliminary estimate, the Commission didn't give an explanation for the decline. However, the drop in December was due to a more pessimistic assessment by consumers of the outlook for the economy, and the risk of becoming unemployed. 

"It is likely that higher inflation and the increasing fiscal squeeze in many countries is increasingly weighing down on confidence," said  Howard Archer, an economist at IHS Global Insight. "In addition, consumers are likely worried that the euro zone's heightened sovereign debt problems could increasingly feed through to hurt economic activity." 

The continued decline in confidence suggests that consumers are unlikely to increase their spending soon, and that in turn will limit the pace of the currency area's economic recovery. 

Consumer spending rose by just 0.1% in the third quarter, having grown by 0.2% in the second quarter and 0.3% in the first. With business investment falling, that led to economic growth of just 0.3% in the three months to September, during which period the U.S. economy grew by 0.6%. 

—Paul Hannon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com 