How does an artist get to the Louvre? British sculptor Tony Cragg says the key was his well-connected art dealer, the gallery owner Thaddaeus Ropac.

Mr. Cragg, a creator of monumental pieces, based for many years in Wuppertal, Germany, says that his longtime relationship to Mr. Ropac was instrumental in getting his "Versus" placed at the museum. 

The red sun-like sculpture of zigzagging wood was specially commissioned for the Louvre Pyramid, the museum's main entrance area. After the work's Jan. 28 unveiling, it will stay for a year, and there will be a related exhibit of several Cragg works. (Mr. Ropac didn't disclose the details of his gallery's negotiations with the Louvre, but said preparations took 2½ years.)

Mr. Ropac, age 50, has charted an unusual course in the European art market. Other major galleries, like Zurich's Hauser & Wirth and Cologne, Germany's Sprüth Magers, have recently chosen to expand or to relocate entirely to Europe's presumed contemporary art capitals, London and Berlin. But Mr. Ropac, a native Austrian who began in Salzburg in 1983 and seven years later expanded to Paris, has stayed put.

Paris is now "one of the main capitals of contemporary art again," said Mr. Ropac in a phone interview from Salzburg. 

The dealer has attracted many of the world's most important artists, including German painter Georg Baselitz, German painter and sculptor Anselm Kiefer, and the collaborative duo Gilbert & George. 

When he opened his gallery in the heart of Paris's Marais district, Paris was largely seen as a second-tier city for contemporary art. "I had the feeling that things were moving on in other places and not in France," he says. 

The emergence of important local art collectors has helped to restore the city's art-world status in recent years, he says. 

Businessman François Pinault, whose holding company Groupe Artémis owns Christie's auction house, and Bernard Arnault, chairman of LVMH, the French luxury conglomerate, have become civic tastemakers, Mr. Ropac says. He also cites the re-emergence of FIAC, Paris's art fair, which he places in importance just behind fairs in Basel, Switzerland, and Miami. 

 Christian Ehrentraut, a gallery owner based in Berlin, says Mr. Ropac runs the "ideal blue-chip gallery." 

He admires the way Mr. Ropac's gallery can intermingle younger, edgier artists, like the Brooklyn-based French painter Jules de Balincourt, with "super-big" figures like Mr. Baselitz.

Mr. Ropac's artists emphasize another aspect: his predilection for paying promptly. "With other galleries you sometimes have to fight for money," says Erwin Wurm, the Austrian sculptor. 

Mr. Wurm, whose profile has risen sharply since he allied himself with Mr. Ropac a few years ago, opened his first show at the Paris gallery last week. "An artwork can breathe there," he says of the gallery's large second-floor space.

Mr. Ropac wants to expand in Paris but is also cautiously eyeing the Internet. "We are participating in the so-called VIP Art Fair," says Mr. Ropac, of the late-January event in which around 140 galleries will show their wares exclusively online. "It's impressive," he says, but he remains attached to the old combination of live art and real people. "I still push our collectors to use the gallery as their main tool."