LONDON—The euro zone's inflation rate rose to its highest level for 28 months in February, driven by higher costs for fuels for transport, heating oil, electricity, and gas, official data showed Wednesday. 

The data, while expected, are likely to heighten expectations the European Central Bank will soon raise its main interest rate from the record low of 1%, where it has been since May 2009. After the bank's last policy meeting March 3, ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet said an increase next month was possible. 

"We believe that it will be extremely difficult to stop the hawks from pushing the bank into a small pre-emptive rate hike," said  Peter Vanden Houte, an economist at ING. "However, an aggressive tightening cycle seems out of the question. After a 25-basis-point interest rate hike in April, we expect a second rate hike only in the fourth quarter of this year." 

The euro zone's annual inflation rate rose to 2.4% in February from 2.3% in January, the highest level since October 2008 and unchanged from the preliminary, or flash, estimate published on March 1, the European Unions' Eurostat agency said. 

On a monthly basis, the consumer-price index increased 0.4% in February after a 0.7% drop in January, driven by rising prices for package holidays, accommodation services, heating oil, fruit, fuels for transport, and gardens, plants and flowers, Eurostat said. 

The data show rising energy prices continue to push the inflation rate above the ECB's medium-term target of just below 2%. In February, energy prices rose 0.9% from the previous month and were 13.1% higher than in February last year, the sharpest annual gain since September 2008. 

Underlying, or core, inflation—which excludes volatile items like energy, food, alcohol and tobacco—slowed to an annual rate of 1% in February from 1.1% the previous month. 

Inflation in alcohol and tobacco prices eased to 3.5% year-to-year from 3.7% in January, but the rise in housing costs accelerated to 4.9% from 4.5% and transport inflation jumped to 5.7% from 5.1%, the highest rates since October 2008 and April 2010 respectively. 

Food inflation also picked up after easing the previous month, with the year-to-year rate increasing to 2% in February from 1.5% in January, Eurostat said.

Separately, Eurostat said wage growth in the euro zone picked up in the final three months of last year from its record-low pace, although pay still rose less rapidly than prices.

Wages were 1.4% higher than in the same period of 2009, having risen by just 0.8% in the third quarter, which was the smallest increase since records began in 2000. 

The figures once again highlighted the widening divergence between some larger members of the euro zone and the smaller economies that have been forced to seek outside help to fund their huge budget deficits. 

So while wages grew by 2.7% in France and 1.4% in Germany, they fell by 5.5% in Greece and 1.3% in Ireland. As members of the euro zone, neither Greece nor Ireland are able to depreciate their currency to regain competitiveness, so both have had to resort to what are known as "internal devaluations," or wage cuts, in an effort to reduce their dependence on foreign capital. 

Employment edged up only modestly over the final three months of last year, so consumer spending appears unlikely to grow rapidly in the months ahead or make a major contribution to growth in the broader economy. 