As food prices soar, investors are reaching for funds that can help them reap the gains. 

Wholesale food prices jumped 3.9% last month, the biggest increase in more than 36 years, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. And global food prices tracked by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization hit a record in February, with cereal, dairy and meat prices all showing gains. 

Russian drought, Australian floods and other recent weather calamities have disrupted harvests and helped push food prices higher. While commodity prices are as changeable as the weather, there are longer-term forces that could keep food prices high, from the growing interest in corn-based ethanol and other biofuels to rising demand for meat in emerging economies. 

As a result, investors are flocking to exchange-traded funds focused on agricultural commodities like corn, wheat and cattle. These include funds that hold farming-related stocks and ones that hold futures contracts tied to commodities. Agriculture funds are the most popular type of U.S. commodity ETFs this year, drawing $2.6 billion of new money through February, according to  BlackRock Inc. 

More fund firms are seeking a place at the table. This week, index and fund provider IndexIQ launched the  IQ Global Agribusiness Small Cap ETF, which holds stocks tied to crop production, livestock operations and other agricultural businesses. And United States Commodity Funds LLC plans to launch the United States Agriculture Index fund, which will adjust allocations to various futures contracts each month based on an assessment of inventory levels for corn, wheat and other commodities. 

Be warned: Profiting from the trend isn't as easy as buying a bushel of corn. Since prices of many agricultural commodities have climbed already, investors today aren't getting in at ground level. What's more, "it's so hard to predict what crop prices are going to do because one of the main factors is weather," says  Jeffrey Stafford, a stock analyst at  Morningstar Inc. 

But since higher prices will drive farmers to plant more acres, stocks tied to fertilizer, chemicals, seeds and machinery look like a good bet, analysts and money managers say. Top holdings in the  Market Vectors Agribusiness and  PowerShares Global Agriculture Portfolio ETFs include seed maker  Monsanto Co., fertilizer producer  Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan Inc., and agricultural chemicals company  Syngenta AG. 

Some mutual fund managers are grazing in the same area. In the  Encompass Fund, a world stock portfolio, BioExx Specialty Proteins Ltd. was a top holding as of Dec. 31. The fund lately has been adding to its holdings in the company, which extracts oils and proteins from oilseeds, as a way to benefit from rising food prices, says co-manager  Marshall Berol. The fund gained 56% in the 12 months ended Thursday, landing near the top of the world stock category. 

Futures-based funds are a trickier bet. They can face a drag on returns known as "contango," in which the price for longer-dated futures contracts is higher than those of closer months. In such cases the funds may be continuously selling cheaper contracts and buying pricier ones. 

Recent generations of funds are finding new ways to deal with the problem. The  PowerShares DB Agriculture fund uses a quantitative approach to move assets to various contracts, which should help minimize contango-related losses, says  Abraham Bailin, ETF analyst at Morningstar. And the index tracked by United States Commodity Funds' planned agriculture fund has built-in protections against this drag on returns, tending to underweight those commodities that are in contango and overweight those that aren't, says  John Hyland, chief investment officer. 

But for most investors looking to profit from rising food prices, it makes sense to stick with funds that hold stocks. "If you're looking for leverage on the upside, the equities might be a good bet," Morningstar's Mr. Bailin says.

 Write to  Eleanor Laise at eleanor.laise@wsj.com 