SYDNEY—Australia's already-tight labor market will be squeezed further in the rush to rebuild the flood-devastated state of Queensland and reopen shuttered mines, industry experts warned Tuesday.

"There's a lot of work out there now and there's got to be an effect from this," said  Peter Taylor, chief executive of industry group Engineers Australia. "Before the global financial crisis there was almost daily news about projects having to be deferred due to lack of staff. You can expect some of that again."

At least 5 billion Australian dollars (US$4.97 billion) will be needed for government-funded reconstruction alone in Queensland, with Australia & New Zealand Banking Group on Tuesday warning of a A$20 billion rebuilding tab. Before river banks burst in the state capital of Brisbane last week, most of the damage and disruption to business had been centered on the state's mines, which provide a third of the thermal coal traded in the Pacific.



The government has already sent more than 1,200 troops to help in the cleanup and recovery, but thousands more workers from the private sector will be needed for rebuilding. This after wages across the country rose 3.6% in the 12 months ending last September, outpacing the 2.8% rise in inflation, and as economists forecast a pickup in the pace for 2011 and 2012.

The need for even more engineers and contractors at a time when a resource-led boom continues to drive down unemployment has rekindled a call from local economists and business leaders for the government to open the gates for more short-term manual labor visas, or specific industry permits. Rigorous employment-visa regulations make it tough for companies to recruit from overseas.

The unemployment rate fell to 5% in December, and is even lower in mine-heavy Western Australia, compared with 9.1% in the U.S. and nearly 8% in the U.K. But despite the demand for labor, population growth is slowing.



Austalia's population increased at an average 1.4% a year over 40 years, with the number of entrants rising in each of those years. But with new visa restrictions in effect, fewer immigrants arrived in the year ending last June 30 than in the preceding year. (Other factors may have played a part, with a 20% surge in the Australian dollar against the U.S. greenback last year, increasing inflation and a string of central bank interest-rate increases pushing pushed up the cost of living.)

The country's biggest employers in the key mining industry like  Rio Tinto Ltd.
RIO


0.25
%




 believe they can weather the wage pressure created by demand for workers to rebuild Queensland. The company plans to expand its iron-ore production in Western Australia's Pilbara region by more than 50% to 333 million tons a year by 2015, arguing the effects of the flood on the labor market will be cushioned by the thousands of kilometers separating the region from the flood zone.

"In terms of the race for labor, obviously it adds to the pressure but we've had that for a long time," said a Rio Tinto spokesman. "The Pilbara is a separate micro-economy to the rest of the country, with its own unique wage pressures."

Notably, companies in Western Australia are already paying drivers of heavy trucks six-figure salaries, while experienced crane operators can earn hundreds of thousands a year. The surge in labor costs has long been a thorn in the side of Australia's mining companies, with wages increasing by 10% annually over much of the past decade even as wages in other industries were flat. This time, however, with immigration down and unemployment already pinched, the impact could be broader.

"We will see the new industrialization tested in a very tight labor market and whether those demand pressures will be contained in mining and not flow into other areas like retail is unlikely," said  Scott Haslem, chief economist for UBS in Sydney.

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com and David Fickling at david.fickling@dowjones.com 