NEW YORK --Bank of America Corp. said the chairman of India's Reliance Industries Ltd. was appointed as director, and will stand for election at the bank's board of directors at its annual meeting next month. 

A spokesman for the bank declined to comment about whether the 13-member board was expanding, or if a current member wasn't standing for reelection. 

  Mukesh D. Ambani, 53, has run India's Reliance since 2002 and will be the first non-U.S. citizen to join the board of the nation's largest bank by assets.

Reliance Industries, an energy and materials company, is the largest non-government business in India, with mor than $44.6 billion in annual revenues and $70 billion in market capitalization.

"Bank of America's shareholders will benefit from the global perspective Mr. Ambani brings to our board," the bank's chairman,  Charles O. Holliday, Jr., said in a statement. 

"It is a privilege and a great honor for me, as the first non-American citizen to join the board of one of the world's largest financial institutions," Mr. Ambani said in a statement."

Mr. Ambani will serve on the board's compensation-and-benefits committee as well as the credit committee, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. 

Only one board member sat on both those committees in 2010:  William Boardman, 69, formerly head of international operations of  Visa Inc.
V


0.03
%




 

Bank spokesman  Scott Silvestri also declined to comment on whether or not Mr. Boardman was remaining on the board or whether the board was shuffling roles. 

The bank's annual meeting is scheduled for next month and a proxy statement, which would include which board members are up for election, is expected later this month. 

Mr. Ambani would be the youngest independent board member at the bank and second only to Chief Executive  Brian Moynihan, who is 51. 

The oldest board member is 71-year-old  Virgis Colbert, a senior adviser to brewing company MillerCoors, a joint venture of SABMiller PLC and Molson Coors Brewing Co.  Charles Rossotti of Carlyle Group is second-oldest at 70. Both Mr. Colbert and Mr. Rossotti have been directors since 2009. 

