COLUMBUS, Ohio—The most ambitious attempt by a state this year to restrict union rights is being scaled back to reflect some Republicans' concerns that it is vulnerable to legal challenges and would spark a backlash.

The leader of the effort to downsize Ohio Senate Bill 5 is Sen. Bill Seitz, a conservative who was behind the state law banning same-sex marriages and rules limiting damages in civil cases. Mr. Seitz and five other Republican state senators voted against the bill and are pressing for revisions in the state House, which is considering the bill now. 

The back-and-forth among Ohio Republicans reflects a broader debate about how far to go in restricting union rights across the U.S. Bills are wending through more than 20 statehouses that would limit or take away collective-bargaining rights, which allow unions to negotiate on behalf of workers. 

The Ohio bill, which passed the Senate 17-16, would take away the ability of public-employee unions to negotiate over pensions and health benefits, and tie wage increases to performance instead of years of service. The bill would do away with binding arbitration in contract disputes, and let elected officials choose their own contract offer over a union's when negotiations break down. Unions are threatening to try to overturn any new law through a ballot referendum.

Mr. Seitz said he agreed with "85%" of the bill, but opposed applying the changes to police and firefighters, who have "ultra-hazardous" jobs. He also said letting local officials impose their own contract terms was "the most incomprehensible and unfair thing I have ever heard of." 

Mr. Seitz also opposes a provision that would ban public employees from discussing with elected officials any topic that could become a subject of bargaining, saying that could spark legal challenges. GOP House Speaker William Batchelder said Friday that provision was "bunk" and would be taken out.

Lawmakers are working this weekend to amend the bill before it goes to the House Commerce and Labor Committee for a vote Tuesday. Mr. Batchelder said one amendment would clarify that police and firefighters would still be able to negotiate over safety equipment, and that lawmakers were still debating how contract disputes should be settled.

He said the bill had caused "a very big dispute" among Republicans, even though they generally agree public employees' power to bargain over wages and benefits needed scaling back.

Mr. Seitz's opposition to the bill in the Senate led him to be replaced on a key panel with another GOP member who supported the bill, 30 minutes before the committee met to pass the bill. "It was not lost on our hundreds of thousands of police and firefighters and others that if that's what can be done to a senator, what will happen to other workers?" Mr. Seitz said.

Democratic Senate Minority Leader Capri Cafaro said Republican opposition to the bill indicated "bipartisan agreement that it's problematic and could have a real damaging effect on our communities." 

Newly elected Ohio Gov. John Kasich has pushed for the bill, saying local governments need flexibility to rein in labor costs across the state, which faces an $8 billion shortfall.

The current Ohio bill goes further in scaling back public-employee union rights than the controversial measure recently passed in Wisconsin, which was opposed by five Republican lawmakers there. 

Some Republicans say the Ohio bill risks a voter backlash, drawing parallels with the Republican Revolution of 1994 that gave Republicans control of the U.S. House. Two years later, the GOP gave up some gains to Democrats, with some Republicans blaming overly aggressive moves by then-House Speaker Newt Gingrich.

But others say the timing is right now, given the 2010 Republican gains and states' current fiscal woes. "I think there's an opportunity to do some things politically that would have been difficult before, because the mood to cut spending is much different," said Phil Kerpen, vice president for policy at Americans for Prosperity, a conservative group. 

Stuart Rothenberg, an independent political analyst in Washington, said politicians in Ohio, Wisconsin and other states were taking a reasonable risk. What matters is how voters feel in three years, he said. If the states are able to repair their finances, and if economic growth recovers, "people will look back and say it was worthwhile," he said. If the economy is weak and there is "more crime and more houses burning down," there will be a backlash.

Ohio GOP Sen. Kevin Bacon said he didn't expect a voter backlash: "There's a silent majority out there [supporting the legislation], I believe." Mr. Bacon said the bill "gives governments flexibility to adjust their budgets in a down economy." 

Mr. Seitz believes the bill could be tossed out by voters unless some changes are made. "I am cast in an unlikely role" as the improbable labor ally, he said. The lawmaker was named "legislator of the year" in 2008 by the American Legislative Exchange Council, a group of more than 2,000 lawmakers nationwide who support free markets and limited government. 

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com and James R. Hagerty at bob.hagerty@wsj.com 