AUSTIN, Texas—As this year's South by Southwest film festival concludes Saturday, programmers for various New York film venues have begun taking stock of discoveries they hope to screen in the coming months. Three talked about some of their favorites.



   Jake Perlin, associate film programmer at BAMcinematek. 

 "I was really, really, really blown away by a film called 'Where Soldiers Come From.' It really distinguishes itself from other films I've seen about Iraq and Afghanistan." The documentary, by  Heather Courtney, follows a group from Michigan's Upper Peninsula who join the military and are deployed to Afghanistan. "You see them before, during and after this life-changing event," Mr. Perlin said. "She does a beautiful job capturing the spirit of these kids."

Mr. Perlin was scoping out possible selections for the annual BAMcinemaFEST, which runs June 16-26. Several films have already been announced, including SXSW features "Septien" (by New York filmmaker and critic  Michael Tully), "The Catechism Cataclysm" (by  Todd Rohal) and "The Ballad of Genesis and Lady Jaye," a kaleidoscopic portrait of avant-garde performer Genesis Breyer P-orridge and the late Lady Jaye, companions and collaborators in "pandrogyny"—an ongoing experiment to become a single, unified gender.

"Green," the first film directed by the Williamsburg writer and actor  Sophia Takal, also impressed Mr. Perlin. "It was a big highlight of the festival," he said, "enthralling for both a fascinating script and serious filmmaking style." Ms. Takal, 24, won the SXSW Chicken & Egg Emergent Narrative Woman Director prize for the film. Alongside fellow writer-director (and boyfriend)  Lawrence Levine and actor  Kate Lyn Sheil, she stars in the tale of a bohemian New York couple whose retreat to the country leads to a disturbing spiral in their relationship.

   Thom Powers, programmer for the "Stranger Than Fiction" documentary series at IFC Center. 

 "I'd rank 'Undefeated' among the 10 best sports documentaries," said Mr. Powers, who didn't attend SXSW but commented on related films he'd already seen and hoped to program. "It delivers powerful emotions that can reach beyond the demographic of football fans. The coach at the center of the film should have a career on the inspirational lecture circuit." The Weinstein Company acquired the film, about poor kids in a Memphis high school whose lives are transformed by a volunteer football coach.

"If they play this right, they'll have an Oscar contender," he said.

Mr. Powers also likes "Fightville," a documentary about mixed martial arts—or "ultimate fighting"—from the same filmmaking team that did the Iraq war-themed films "Gunner Palace" and "How To Fold a Flag." "It's a departure for them," he said of directors  Petra Epperlein and  Michael Tucker. "They bring something extra in terms of cinematography and lyricism." Already booked for a screening on a future "Stranger Than Fiction" program is "Better This World," about a pair of young men charged as domestic terrorists during the 2008 GOP convention in Minneapolis. "It raises very provocative questions about the use of government informants to infiltrate and provoke radical elements at the convention. The two characters are very compelling."



   Aaron Hillis, programmer at reRun Gastropub Theater. 

 "Bellflower," a debut feature by Los Angeles director  Evan Glodell, was among several no-budget independent films that impressed the programmer. The visually stylized film veers from buddy comedy to apocalyptic tragedy as it tracks the explosive extremes of friendship, romance, heartbreak and revenge within a scrubby post-collegiate circle of boozers and gearheads. It prompted a noisy walkout at the screening Mr. Hillis attended. "I realize this film is going to be polarizing but I found it to be exhilarating, artful and entertaining, and has a counter-cultural edge to it." The film's automotive motif, which includes two customized cars tricked out by the director as key parts of the narrative, also fits with the venue's drive-in/junkyard aesthetic.

Mr. Hillis also cited "Sound of My Voice," a film starring Sundance buzz-maker  Brit Marling, who co-wrote the script with director Zal Batmanglij. It's a minimalist sci-fi mystery about a Silver Lake couple who infiltrate a cult led by a charismatic woman (Ms. Marling) whose ambiguous identity unsettles the pair. "I'm a little shocked that no one's picked it up yet," Mr. Hillis said. "It's one of the freshest takes on a familiar indie arc I've seen in some time."