The more talk there is of making private creditors pay for euro-zone bailouts to avoid spending taxpayers' money, the more it seems that additional public money will be needed.

The paradox is, in a way, a vicious circle. Escaping it will be the euro zone's biggest challenge over the next year. How to do so isn't yet clear.

The problem is this: The international bailouts of Greece and Ireland, by design, don't contain enough money to cover all the countries' needs. Both are expected to begin issuing long-term debt next year, alongside the rescue money from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund, to help finance their own deficits and repay existing creditors.

But investors are shunning the bailout patients. Bond yields in Greece, Ireland and Portugal this week hit levels as high as they've reached since the euro zone began.

Many analysts—and, privately, some officials in Brussels—point to a reason: The extensive fixation over how to force losses on the very type of investors Greece, Ireland and probably Portugal, which is now negotiating a bailout, will soon need to raise money from.

German Chancellor Angela Merkel has since at least last fall pushed for possible private-sector losses in future crises. In February, Finland's  Jyrki Katainen, the finance minister who in all likelihood will be the next prime minister, made clear that private investors' money has to be at risk. And, indeed, the new European Stability Mechanism bailout fund, or ESM, which starts operation in 2013, does just that.

That poses a problem. If investors are too scared to put up the money, it'll have to come from somewhere. And chances are, that means the EU.

For instance, under projections released in February, Greece is expected to issue €26.7 billion ($39.2 billion) in long-term debt next year. 

The secondary market currently wants more than 15% to lend to Greece for 10 years—a clear sign Athens will have an extremely hard time raising that sum from private investors.

That's particularly vexing to EU officials, who had hoped that their pressure on Greece to reform its fiscal ways would assuage investors.

Ireland is supposed to tiptoe back into long-term debt markets sometime in 2012; a spokesman for Ireland's finance ministry says no decision has been made on precisely when. 

Ireland's 10- and 2-year bonds currently yield more than 10% in the secondary market. As with Greece, that will have to come down.

 Partially funding a bailout is not unusual. Rescue aid is designed to replace market funding for a short period of time, but any successful rescue entails persuading private-sector creditors that it's OK to lend again. The high yields show that they aren't yet convinced. And that's already compressing the timeline.

Under the European Commission's initial examination of Ireland's situation, released in February, the country was projected to begin issuing treasury bills—€1.6 billion worth—in the first quarter of this year. 

That didn't happen, and thus €1.6 billion will have to come from somewhere else. 

A particular problem for Ireland is that domestic banks are typically big buyers of treasury bills, and Irish banks are not in the best of shape.

EU officials stress that the projections are estimates, and there is room to adjust them as the situation develops.

 Earlier this month, European officials completing a review of the situation in Ireland said the Irish bailout was "broadly on track," though they didn't release detailed new fiscal figures; those will come in several weeks.

Playing tough with private investors is partly political—in the recent elections Finland's Mr. Katainen faced a hard-line party that wanted no bailouts at all, and a mainstream party that wouldn't back them unless bond investors shared the pain. 

But it is partly realistic: By any rational measure, lending money to Greece, with soaring debt and persistent deficits, should carry risk—European taxpayers can't be expected to shoulder it all.

The EU has also declared that the new ESM will be a preferred creditor when it lends to countries in trouble—meaning it would be paid back before private-sector lenders (but after the International Monetary Fund). This rattled ratings agencies and helped trigger a cascade of downgrades to Greek, Irish and Portuguese debt—not aiding bond yields, either.

European officials are treading the line carefully: The final details of the ESM haven't been worked out, but one option favored by some would make the bailout fund preferred only with respect to debt that already exists, but on an equal footing with any creditors who come in afterwards—a stance that could help attract new money. 

European governments ought to hope that something does. Otherwise, they will soon find themselves writing another check. 

 Write to  Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com 