CHRISTCHURCH—Disaster experts are questioning why so many of the buildings damaged in last year's earthquake in New Zealand were given the all-clear, an alleged oversight that some say added to the calamity brought by last week's quake in Christchurch.

"Everything had been weakened by that first quake, that's for sure," said Steve Calanog, a federal "on scene" coordinator for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's emergency-response team in San Francisco.

The 6.3-magnitude earthquake on Feb. 22 was an aftershock of a larger 7.0-magnitude tremor in September. Following the first quake, buildings were assessed by local engineers and given green, yellow or red tags to show whether the structures were fully cleared, required structural changes or needed to be condemned. Codes that determine the tags—updated in New Zealand about five years ago—have provoked the most debate among experts. 

Mr. Calanog, an incident commander following Hurricane Katrina, and the staff at the EPA say even green-tagged buildings in Christchurch should probably have received structural improvements to their foundations after the initial quake.

The New Zealand Department of Building and Housing oversees the classification of buildings. A spokesman declined Monday to elaborate on its tagging practices, saying only that it takes its lead from industry experts on the ground, including educators and workers in the public and private sectors.

Globally, engineers have argued for tougher standards to help avoid the level of destruction seen in Christchurch, where Police said Tuesday that as many as 240 people are feared dead.

Speaking outside the smashed Canterbury Television building, where 120 people are thought to have died, a New Zealand engineer called for better regulations governing the survey of buildings possibly damaged by earthquakes.

"We should have a more defined process of how buildings are reviewed after an earthquake," said  Quincy Ma, a structural-dynamics expert at the University of Auckland. "Hopefully, our current standards will improve over time as we continuously look at our buildings and see how they develop."

Work to recover bodies continued Monday in Christchurch, where almost a third of buildings in the central business district have been deemed unsafe.

Prime Minister John Key all but ruled out a tax to cover reconstruction. He said damage by the two earthquakes could total 20 billion New Zealand dollars (US$15 billion) and that rebuilding Christchurch would become "core" to the May budget. "I don't want to put on another levy because I think it will slow the economy," he said. 

The Treasury confirmed the government had asked about possible taxation to raise funds. Also Monday, the prime minister announced an emergency business-recovery package valued between NZ$100 million and NZ$120 million for businesses in Christchurch that are unlikely to reopen soon—and for their employees.

First NZ Capital economist  Chris Green, using what he said may turn out to be "conservative assumptions," said that relative to gross domestic product, the earthquake may cost five times what Hurricane Katrina did.

According to Miyamoto International, a global earthquake and structural-engineering concern, brick buildings and concrete structures built in Christchurch in the mid-1970s—before improved standards were put in place in response to better understanding of seismic events—are in dire need of reinforcement.

  Kit Miyamoto, the company's chief executive, said New Zealand building standards are among the world's most rigorous, but not thorough enough given the scale of the September seismic activity and the level of ground liquefaction. Liquefaction happens when soil loses its strength because of an applied stress—such as an earthquake.

"Building codes are minimum guidelines and give a false sense of security," he said. "A building is not earthquake-proof because it passes some guidelines; these buildings must be anchored." 

Mr. Miyamoto's company has a team in Christchurch assessing the damage as he oversees similar work in earthquake-torn Haiti. His firm says about 40% of the buildings in Christchurch either collapsed or were heavily damaged by the quake. 

In 2004, authorities in New Zealand required that older buildings be strengthened to at least one-third of the preferred standard. Buildings in Christchurch and other areas were given 20 years or more to meet the standards due to the cost of improvements. Standards accounting for ground liquefaction weren't included in the new rules.

After the September quake, some business owners decided to go beyond the law's requirements.  Stephen Mateer, owner of the Lyttelton Coffee Club, added reinforcements for his 110-year-old building that was full of lunchtime diners when the quake hit Tuesday.

"The seismic strengthening saved us," said Mr. Mateer.

—Lucy Craymer and Rebecca Howard contributed to this article.

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 