MUMBAI –India's central bank will not take any new steps to ease a prolonged cash crunch in the banking system, which included more bond buybacks to inject liquidity, the bank's governor Duvvuri Subbarao, said Thursday. 

"The reason we aren't doing that [more bond buybacks] is because we believe we have done all that the RBI could reasonably do to ease the liquidity situation," Mr. Subbarao said at a teleconference with analysts.

A clutch of factors have squeezed liquidity over the past several months in India and the Reserve Bank of India chief expects the government's spending to be raised or cash balances to be carried forward in the next federal budget to partly address the shortage. 

The RBI has also asked banks to curb their lending to reduce mismatches caused by sluggish deposit growth. 

"The frictional and the structural components of the liquidity situation must unwind in the months ahead," Mr. Subbarao said. 

The Reserve Bank of India is taking rising government bond yields as an indication of firming up inflation expectations and won't use bond buybacks to influence yields, Deputy Governor  Subir Gokarn said. 

"From the policy view point, looking ahead, it [rising yields] is taken as one indicator that inflation expectations do have an influence on longer-term yields," Mr. Gokarn said at an interaction with reporters. "So we are clearly watching that [bond yields] with great interest." 

The central bank Tuesday raised its key policy rates by 0.25 percentage point to tackle rising prices, and raised its March-end inflation estimate to 7% from 5.5%. 

Government bond yields have risen over the past few weeks with the 10-year yield rising more than 0.2 percentage point over the past month as accelerating inflation has firmed up fears of more monetary tightening in the days ahead. 

Inflation accelerated to 8.43% year-on-year in December from 7.43% in the previous month, driven largely by food prices. According to data released Thursday, the year-on-year inflation rate for food articles rose slightly to 15.57% in the week to Jan. 15 from 15.52% in the previous week. 

A liquidity crunch in the banking system has added to the bond market's woes. 

Banks are borrowing, on average, more than 1 trillion rupees ($22 billion) daily from the RBI, way above its comfort level of 1% of net deposits for both a cash shortage and a surplus. 

Mr. Subbarao said the RBI's liquidity comfort level was independent of the government's cash balances holding or the banks' statutory liquidity ratio holding requirement. 

The central bank, in its December mid-quarter review, said it will buy back up to 480 billion rupees of government bonds over a month to ease the liquidity situation. Of that, it bought back 370.68 billion rupees of government paper. 

The RBI desisted from announcing any new buyback program after its monetary policy review Tuesday. Instead, to address the cash shortage, it extended to April 8 a facility that allowed banks to seek up to 1% of their deposits in additional liquidity support and a second daily liquidity-injection window. 

"Open market operations is a monetary policy instrument. It is not a debt management instrument. So that is the way we'll be using it; not as debt management instrument or to influence the yield curve," Mr. Gokarn said. 

He said bond buybacks are a liquidity injection tool on a temporary and reversible basis. 

Mr. Gokarn said also that the central bank wasn't immediately looking at restoring the 1 percentage point reduction in banks' minimum bond holding to 24%, effected in December. 

"We brought it down with a specific objective which was to address frictional liquidity...But for the moment, frictional liquidity remains an issue," he said, referring to the slow flow of cash from the government's account to the banking system. 

Large cash balances of the government had exacerbated the liquidity shortage, with the RBI's government cash holding hovering between 1% and 3% of banks' net deposits in October-December, equivalent to a 100-300 basis points rise in the cash reserve ratio. 

Cash balances will play an important role in the scheduling of the government's borrowing program for the next fiscal year that begins April 1, Mr. Gokarn said. 

"The scheduling has a direct bearing on how we manage liquidity and, given that there is a cash balance that will be carried into next year, this may, and should, have an impact on the scheduling." 

He said with the government likely to stick to its fiscal deficit target of 4.8% of gross domestic product in the next fiscal year, the government's borrowing will likely be commensurate with that aim. 

The central bank's move Tuesday, asking banks to curb lending, wasn't a "policy tool" to tackle inflation, he also said. 

 Write to  Subhadip Sircar at subhadip.sircar@dowjones.com 