Spoiled by nearly 8,000 kilometers of shimmering coastline, Italians know a thing or two about beaches. Yet when summer beckons, it is not to the rocky coves of the Amalfi coast or to the endless sandy shores of the Adriatic that they retreat to far niente. Instead, in a flurry of pink polos and nautical shorts, the smart set hop on a ferry toward an island bathed in golden light: Sardinia.

The draw of Sicily's more rustic sister is deceptively simple: sun-baked hills, crescent-shaped beaches nestled at the end of dirt roads and the clearest water this side of the Caribbean. No wonder the Aga Khan fell in love. The billionaire Muslim prince took one look at the island 50 years ago and decided then and there to carve out a corner of paradise. Unfortunately, today, come June, tacky soccer players and gold-digging TV starlets and rich playboys mostly haunt the 55-kilometer stretch of coast, known as Costa Smeralda, that the Aga Khan once thought of as his exclusive retreat.

But for a taste of the untouched beauty he first laid his eyes on, one need only head west 30 kilometers, to the unassuming village of Porto Rafael. There are no hotels, just low-built stone villas glimpsed from behind heavy, wooden gates, plus a jewel of a piazza framed by whitewashed walls smothered in bougainvillea. The tiny beach is mere meters from the outdoor tables. Nightlife consists of ordering a chilled glass of mirto, a local liquor made of myrtle, and watching the sun set on Maddalena archipelago in the distance.

There are no resorts in Porto Rafael, but fret not: Sardinia is dotted with discreet luxury villas to rent. A good place to start your search is Immbolsarda (www.immobilsarda.com) or Sardinian Villas (www.sardinianvillas.com). If it's a hotel you're after, because pampering is the order of the day, then descend upon the five-star Hotel Capo d'Orso (www.hotelcapodorso.com), located a few kilometers outside the village of Palau. The Aga Khan would not have complained: the hotel's spacious rooms and suites are scattered throughout a lush private park of wild olive and juniper trees, all sloping gently toward the wind-sheltered bay of Cala Capra. The interiors are streamlined and elegant, with enormous beds dressed in demure white and yellow linen, and flanked by pleasantly cool terracotta floors.

When it's time for a dip, a saltwater pool awaits you; it's good for thalassotherapy, though too small for laps. Open-water folks will never be at a loss for choice, however, with two sanded private beaches. The spa is only open to hotel guests and excels at water treatments that focus on firming and slimming. Two must-do treatments: the salt-and-Sardinian-lavender scrub and the al fresco massage, replete with an astonishing view of the sea. For the sportier set, an array of activities are on offer, including sailing excursions and daily cruises to the islands of the archipelago. Those who prefer to stay on land can saddle up and saunter along an easy trail toward the bear-shaped rock, Capo d'Orso, which dominates the bay. 

As for food, a generous buffet served on the shaded terrace makes for a fine start to the day, and the hotel's two restaurants serve contemporary Italian fare that makes the most of flavor-bursting Sardinian produce, though Il Paguro, with its crustacean tank, is more focused on seafood. Hotel restaurants of this caliber are hard to tear oneself away from, but it would be a crime not to have at least one meal at the Michelin-starred La Gritta, a low-key, family owned eatery perched on a cliff just outside Palau. Go at lunch for the killer views or at night to relax on the candle-lit terrace. For a whiff of authenticity, select the pane carasau, the signature Sardinian flat bread that comes drizzled with olive oil, rosemary and salt flakes. First dishes, or primi, include stuffed calamari, chunky toasted bread piled with mullet roe or spaghetti with clams. The portions are small enough to contemplate a further course, such as sea bass baked in a salt crust. The creamiest lemon sorbet makes for a refreshing finale.

In between meals, make the most of the spectacular beaches of northern Sardinia, which make up in natural beauty what they may lack in amenities. There are dozens to choose from, each with a distinct personality: "Le Saline," south of Capo d'Orso, is a series of tiny coves that are particularly pleasant on windy days, while Costa Serena, west of Porto Rafael, is popular with families for its shallow lagoons in which children can safely play and hunt for tiny white crabs. Just beware that finding the beach you've set your heart on can turn into a bit of an adventure, as road signs are sometimes lacking. So start the day with an open mind, a car not afraid of dirt and a good map. And accept that, despite your best intentions, you may end up lost or at a dead end. When it happens, get out of the car, stretch and inspect the bushes for blackberries. Nature's special gift to disgruntled drivers, they grow only in the most remote of spots. Now pick the most shriveled ones on display: they will be the sweetest.

 Or you can play it safe and drive to the well-signed Isola dei Gabbiani, near Porto Pollo. The bay, divided by a thin strip of land, is one of the world's most famous kite-surfing spots, though it's perfectly suitable for windsurfing too. The beach, several kilometers long, is a walker's paradise. Even in August, one can easily find a deserted spot for a dip, and, on a clear day, Corsica towers in the distance. This is a beach where you want to go for the day, because, as the late afternoon sets in, the Baja California vibe picks up and the isthmus comes alive. Dreadlocked boys swap their kite boards for drums, dads drop BlackBerrys to wrestle their sons in the sand and sea breams hiss on the barbecue. Grab a drink and reconnect with your hedonist roots.

Later, drive to Li Espi (www.liespi.it), an eco-friendly guesthouse oozing Mexican hacienda; it opened less than 10 years ago by avid kite-surfer Marcello Ippolito. The dozen rooms make a good, if spartan, base, but the heart of this place is its outdoor restaurant, which every night serves a traditional Sardinian feast. Come ravenous for zuppa Gallurese—layers of bread and cheese combined in a creamy béchamel sauce—and porceddu—suckling pig barbecued on an open fire. This is the true cuisine of the region of Gallura, where meat and cheese, not fish, form the staple of the diet. For centuries, the locals feared the sea, which only ever brought invasions, and thus built their villages on mountain flanks.

San Pantaleo, on the road from Arzachena to Porto Cervo, is just such an example. There is a town square, a pretty Roman church and an imposing fig tree. In its shade, errant cats nap. Around the corner from the piazza, a small shop called Petra Sarda sells handmade earthenware in shades of ocher and gray. The objects are simple, imperfect. And yet, as do pockets of this island, they inspire dreams and flashes of a different, more Sardinian life.

 Write to  Aude Lagorce at aude.lagorce@dowjones.com 