Indiana House Republicans on Monday ratcheted up pressure on Democratic counterparts who left the state last month, increasing fines on absent lawmakers and moving forward with bipartisan hearings in the Senate on the state's budget bill. 

Democrats, holding one of the longest walkouts by a state legislature in U.S. history, left for Illinois on Feb. 22 to protest about a dozen Republican-backed bills. The legislation would eventually cut the pay and jobs of unionized teachers and construction workers, Democrats allege. One right-to-work measure would allow private-sector workers across the state to opt out of unions. 

"This is a defense against an oppressive majority," said House Minority Leader B. Patrick Bauer at the Comfort Suites in Urbana, Ill., where Democrats have been staying for the past month. 

He said Democratic amendments were being ignored and the bills the Republicans were voting on constituted a "radical agenda."

Indiana Republicans say Democrats haven't been clear on conditions to return and are using the walkout to kill off a slate of about 65 bills awaiting a vote in the House. Most importantly, Democrats are holding up action on the state budget. Republicans say. 

"This takes quorum-denial tactics to an entirely new level," said Republican House Majority Speaker Brian Bosma. 

Indiana law requires that two-thirds of lawmakers be present to vote on legislation. Republicans, who hold a 60-40 majority in the House, need seven Democrats to be present and raised a daily fine of $250 for each absent Democrat to $350 a day, effective Monday. 

Democrats said they would return last week, Mr. Bosma said, if a bill allowing nonunion labor on government-funded construction projects was changed. But after Republicans agreed to scale back the bill, Democrats backed off again. 

"It became clear there was a different agenda," he said. 

Mr. Bauer, the House Minority Leader, said the Republicans blew up last week's agreement at the eleventh hour. A deal appeared to be in place at night and then the next morning "their whole attitude changed," Mr. Bauer said.

Rick Muir, president of the Indiana Federation of Teachers, said he expects a compromise on most bills. "I wish they could stay out until they defeated these bills entirely. My gut tells me that's probably not reality," he said. He said unions are sending money from member political contributions to the state Democratic Party, which is helping pay the expenses of the absent Democrats. 

Legislative walkouts to deny a quorum date to at least the mid-nineteenth century. More recently, 50 Texas Democratic legislators fled the state in 2003 to try to thwart a redistricting plan. This month, a three-week standoff in Wisconsin over collective-bargaining rights ended when Republicans worked around the state's quorum requirement for bills containing fiscal items. That approach wouldn't work in Indiana, given the necessary two-thirds quorum. 

 Like Wisconsin, Indiana could be a key state in the 2012 election. In 2008, President Barack Obama carried Indiana by 30,000 votes, the first Democratic presidential candidate to win Indiana since 1964. 

The Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee started running a 30-second TV ad on Monday saying that Gov. Mitch Daniels, and other Republicans in the state, want to "kill collective bargaining" and "slash wages for workers." A spokeswoman for Mr. Daniels declined to comment on the ad. 

Gov. Daniels has taken a much lower profile during the dispute than Gov. Scott Walker did in Wisconsin. Last week, Mr. Daniels said the House Democrats are "forfeiting their duty and right to participate. I want to see the people's work get done, which hasn't happened for a whole month while they have been abandoning their duties. 

Also Monday, the Indiana GOP launched a Web site, "INDemsGPS.com," which relies on news reports and individuals' alerts to track some movements by House Democrats, such as "stealth visits" home to do laundry and pay bills. "We wanted to up the ante on transparency and help Hoosiers keep tabs on their striking legislators," said Pete Seat, a spokesman for the state GOP. 

The Indiana Democrats say life on the lam hasn't been enjoyable. There is one washing machine at the hotel and there are lines to use it. It has rained for almost a month, keeping them indoors except for an occasional walk past strip malls and chain stores. Three have developed sinus infections. After an initial wave of support and visits across state lines from union members and supporters, they have been largely isolated. "We're busy but we're bored," said Democratic Rep. Linda Lawson.

A bulletin board in the conference room where they work bears a quote attributed to Dale Carnegie: "Most of the important things in the world have been accomplished by people who have kept on trying when there seemed to be no hope at all."

Rules aside, tThey are far from marching in lock step: Four legislators say they should return to Indianapolis, keeping the debate lively and occasionally tense. 

"Most of the heated conversations are around exit strategy," said Democrat Phil GiaQuinta. "Should we just go home?"

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com and Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com 