ISTANBUL—European airlines and regulators plan next month to test a new regional emergency-response system intended to help reduce air-traffic disruptions from volcanic ash.

The exercise, spelled out Thursday at an aviation-safety conference here, aims to validate enhanced computer models and data-sharing tools designed to avoid a repeat of last year's airspace shutdowns in Europe that affected more than 100,000 flights and 10 million passengers.

A European air-traffic control official said representatives of more than 200 entities, including airlines, aviation authorities and weather experts, are expected to take part in the two-day exercise. 

The goal is to improve the accuracy and speed of information about ash contamination in the atmosphere,  Maria Cruz Garcia de Dios of Eurocontrol, the Brussels-based organization that manages air-traffic control services for more than 35 countries, said at the conference. Improved forecasting and faster data coordination should help depict "where the [ash] cloud is likely to be at a certain moment and altitude," she said.

By more accurately projecting the movement of ash plumes—and providing updated and detailed maps of potentially hazardous areas—Eurocontrol hopes to avoid the chaos that occurred after the eruption of Iceland's Eyjafjallajökull volcano last spring. 

"We have a real big interest in how it's going to help us" cope with eruptions, said  Kevin Hiatt, executive vice president of the Flight Safety Foundation, which sponsored the European safety seminar. 

Eurocontrol said the emergency system also will help the region cope more effectively with the environmental and other effects from wildfires or nuclear-plant accidents.

Airlines lost an estimated $1.8 billion in revenue because of last spring's air-traffic disruptions. There also was widespread criticism of political disputes and conflicting safety analyses that kept about 80% of Europe's skies off limits to airliners for days. 

The latest computer simulations and assessment tools won't solve the fundamental problem: Safety experts, manufacturers, airlines and regulators haven't agreed on a comprehensive set of standards establishing when it is safe for aircraft to fly through even low-level concentrations of ash. 

Substantial research needs to be done to better understand the way volcanic ash spreads through the atmosphere. International industry and government study groups are at least months away from issuing revised safety guidelines for airlines. And regulators in various countries still will retain the ultimate authority to determine whether flights can operate. 

Meanwhile, Eurocontrol and its partners are trying to assemble their Internet-based emergency network capable of distributing more-accurate and thorough data to decision makers. The impending test "has created a great expectation," according to Ms. Garcia de Dios and "we will be looking at the feedback provided by the different parties." 

In previous years, Eurocontrol helped organize emergency-response exercises to prepare for possible volcanic eruptions. But none of those earlier tests and simulations envisioned the widespread traffic disruptions the region experienced last year.