Chris Bosh did not play. Dwyane Wade was battling migraines, and LeBron James was off his game for the most of the night. But as Landry Fields jumped into Toney Douglas's arms after a game-clinching 3-pointer and his teammates high-fived, the Knicks and all of Madison Square Garden seemed to let out a collective, "Who cares?"

They finally beat the Heat. 

The Knicks topped Mr. James and company 93-88 on Thursday night after losing to them twice earlier this season, as Amar'e Stoudemire scored 24 points and Danilo Gallinari added 20. 

"I think the fact that we lost both of those games [against Miami] earlier, this game was a little more sweet," Mr. Stoudemire said. 

Mr. Wade, who was wearing orange-tinted glasses to protect himself from the migraines, scored a masterful 34 points, with 33 of them coming in the first three quarters. But he missed seven straight shots in the fourth quarter—when the Knicks outscored the Heat 29-15.

The Knicks had lost five straight games against Mr. James at Madison Square Garden, but he was little more than a role player on Thursday night. He scored 24, with 14 through three quarters.

Most of the game brought back memories of the mid-90's Heat-Knicks rivalry games, a defensive struggle with 61 combined free throws and choppy play. In fact, Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni played for long stretches with Ronny Turiaf, Toney Douglas (who played 20 minutes) and Shawne Williams, a group that represents the Knicks' version of a defensive lineup. 

Mr. Douglas played point guard for most of the second half in place of the struggling Mr. Felton, who missed five of his first six shots. Mr. Douglas had two steals and plenty of defensive energy. He is still a defensive specialist, however: He made just one of his six field goal attempts.

The Knicks' last four successful field goals were 3-pointers, and they took control of the game for good with 1:18 left. Mr. Felton threw an off-target pass to Mr. Stoudemire, who used his long wingspan to haul it in. Mr. Stoudemire immediately kicked it out to Mr. Fields on the right wing, who sank a 3-pointer to make it 89-84 with 49 seconds left. Mr. Fields finished the night with 19 points. Mr. James, who scored the Heat's final eight points, scored two quick layups to give the Heat a chance to tie. Point guard Mario Chalmers missed a potential game-tying 3-pointer, and the Knicks had finally ended their losing streak against Mr. James.

There was more good news for the Knicks on the night: Just before the game, it was announced that Mr. Stoudemire will start the All-Star game. He received 1,674,995 votes, beating out Boston Celtics forward Kevin Garnett by more than 200,000 votes. He will be the first Knick to start an All-Star game since Patrick Ewing did it in 1992.

Joining him on the East squad will be Mr. James, who for the most part, is no longer booed by the Garden crowd every time he touches the ball. Fans booed him every time he touched the ball during his first visit last month, and the tradition died out around the second quarter of this game, though the venom toward Mr. James has probably not subsided. 

What Mr. James lacked in production for the first three quarters, he made up for in flash. He scored two impossibly athletic dunks in quick succession in the first quarter. One of them was on an alley-oop from Mr. Wade. Then Mr. James himself threw an impressive alley-oop to Joel Anthony. 

The Heat's two wins against the Knicks earlier this season were a 113-91 shellacking in New York on Dec. 17 and a 106-98 Heat win in Miami on Dec. 28. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 