BEIJING— Starbucks Corp.
SBUX


-0.09
%




 is introducing its instant-coffee packets in China, expanding beyond coffee stores to also sell consumer packaged goods in China. 

The Seattle-based coffee company's Via single-serving coffee packets will be available in more than 800 Starbucks stores across China, Hong Kong and Taiwan beginning April 6,  John Culver, president of Starbucks International, said Tuesday at a news conference here. It will also be distributed in grocery and convenient stores and later in hotels and entertainment venues, Mr. Culver said, adding that a schedule hasn't been determined. 

"We see a big opportunity in packaged goods in China," he said. 

The move signals Starbucks's intention to expand not only its coffee business in China but beyond the beverage as well. Starbucks has been exploring new tactics in the U.S. and internationally to increase its offerings into a broader array of consumer goods. Starbucks dropped the company's name and the word "coffee" from its logo in January. The company rolled out the new logo Tuesday in China. 

Mr. Culver said Starbucks aims to expand its packaged-goods offerings in China and may seek to acquire companies and brands in the country. Starbucks also is setting up a research-and-development center in Shanghai this year, said  Wang Jinlong, president of Starbucks China. It also will focus on creating tea products for sale in China, where tea drinking trumps coffee consumption, he said. 

The company's introduction of instant coffee in China comes sooner than expected. Starbucks Chief Executive  Howard Schultz said in November that consumers needed more time to develop their taste for coffee and that he had no plans to introduce Via in China. 



Mr. Wang said executives changed their minds as China's small cities showed demand for the company's products. 

"There's one speed in China and it's not fast, it's faster," Mr. Wang said. 

Analysts have said profit margins of instant coffee tend to hover around 20%. Sales of instant coffee in China last year jumped 13% to 5.1 billion yuan ($777.9 million), according to research company Euromonitor International. Swiss food company  Nestlé SA
NSRGY


-0.87
%




 dominates China's instant-coffee market with 70% of the market.

Starbucks is preparing for China to become its largest market. In November the company set up a coffee farm and processing facilities in China's southern Yunnan province and announced plans to open 1,000 stores in the country by 2015. It currently operates 450 in mainland China.

 Write to  Laurie Burkitt at laurie.burkitt@wsj.com 