KABUL—Afghan President Hamid Karzai Sunday rebuffed a rare personal apology from U.S. Gen. David Petraeus, telling the commander of coalition forces that saying sorry was "not enough" to make up for a helicopter attack that killed nine Afghan children last week.

Gen. Petraeus apologized to Mr. Karzai at the presidential palace on the same day hundreds of demonstrators marched through central Kabul chanting anti-American slogans, as a growing number of Afghan lawmakers criticized U.S.-led forces for civilian deaths.

Relations between Mr. Karzai and Gen. Petraeus appear to be eroding as the two men are fine-tuning plans to begin reducing the American military presence in Afghanistan this summer.

In their first in-person meeting since the March 1 attack, Gen. Petraeus called the incident a "great mistake," according to a statement from Mr. Karzai's palace.

Mr. Karzai told Gen. Petraeus that civilian casualties caused by U.S.-led forces were "no longer acceptable," and that "apology is not enough," the palace statement said.

"Civilian casualties are the main cause of a worsening relationship between Afghanistan and the U.S.," Mr. Karzai's statement added.

U.S. military officials declined to discuss the general's meeting with Mr. Karzai and the president's top national security advisers. 

The end of winter in Afghanistan has been especially deadly for Afghan civilians.

More than 200 civilians have been killed in military operations and insurgent attacks in recent weeks, including 12 Afghans killed Sunday by a concealed insurgent bomb in eastern Afghanistan.

While Afghan officials said Taliban-led insurgents were responsible for 90% of the recent civilian deaths, it is the errant helicopter strike on the nine children that has generated the greatest furor.

In addition to Gen. Petraeus's apology, President Barack Obama personally expressed "deep regret" for the incident in a videoconference with Mr. Karzai last week.

American contrition failed to placate the protesters in Kabul. 

"They always apologize and then they do it again and again," said  Ahmad Jawaid, a Kabul University student who was one of about 500 demonstrators in Sunday's protest. "We don't want apologies. We want them to take it very seriously and stop."

Bismillah, the father of two of the nine dead boys, was equally unforgiving. "What should I do with their apology? I have lost two sons. I want those responsible to be punished."

Coalition military investigators are trying to find out what happened last Tuesday in Kunar Province when attack helicopters apparently mistook children gathering firewood for a group hidden Afghan insurgents.

Mr. Karzai and Gen. Petraeus were united in denouncing Sunday's insurgent bombing in eastern Afghanistan. Five children were among the 12 fatalities in that incident.

In addition to chanting "Death to America," demonstrators on the streets of Kabul also condemned the recent spike in Taliban attacks on Afghan banks, malls and other "soft targets" that have killed scores of civilians.

"We are being punished by both sides—by foreign troops and the Taliban," said one of the demonstrators, Kabul University student Sadya Noori. 

—Habib Khan Totakhil contributed to this article.