LONDON—For a day, at least, it seemed possible for Britons to believe in the fairy tale.

Prince William took Kate Middleton as his bride, with a million people cheering them on from Westminster Abbey to Buckingham Palace and an estimated two billion or so more watching around the world. The slickly produced global media extravaganza yielded no rain, no security incidents and no gaffes from Britain's pratfall-prone royal family. The bride's dress was widely admired, while many of the country's cynics had previously left the U.K., taking advantage of an unusual bounty of public holidays. 

It may not matter when the country returns to work on Tuesday and realizes the U.K. economy is still on the ropes and three of the four marriages in the last generation of royals ended in divorce. On Friday, everyone was allowed to suspend reality for just a bit. 



"I saw the back of her head!" said Matt Ireland, a 22-year-old Essex resident, watching on the Mall as Queen Elizabeth II, in a lemon-colored wool dress and hat, rolled by in a Bentley on the way to Westminster Abbey. 

Britons who blamed much of the breathless prewedding hype on foreigners—especially Americans—found themselves waving flags and singing the national anthem in parks. The crowds fell silent as the wedding broadcast began promptly at 11 a.m. 

It wasn't just the masses who were waxing lyrical—especially about the former Ms. Middleton (now the Duchess of Cambridge) and her wedding dress. 

"When she came in with that veil over her face, it was almost ethereal, like she was coming through a cloud—an angel coming into the Abbey," said Michael Hintze, the founder of London-based hedge fund CQS, who attended the wedding. He is chairman of the Prince of Wales Foundation for the Built Environment.

In an age when Twitter, Facebook and the online universe allow everyone to be a broadcaster, however, not everyone who set foot in Westminster Abbey got off so easy. The arrival of soccer star David Beckham and his wife, Victoria—the pop star once known as Posh Spice—set off gasps in the crowd and a furious debate on social networks over the merits of an elaborate, oddly tilted pillbox hat. Some loved it, others declared it "a third eye." 

"I hope someone eventually tells Posh Spice she has a large bag on her forehead," wrote one Twitter wag. 

Critics weren't confined to online. "His tie is crooked!" a tourist shouted in Russian as James Middleton, the bride's brother, appeared on a giant TV screen in a park near Buckingham Palace. 

The feel-good atmosphere of central London seemed to lose fizz the farther one ventured from Buckingham Palace. Across England and Wales there were over 5,500 road closure requests for street parties, with Bristol in southwest England proving the most patriotic with 54 applications, according to the Local Government Association. Antiwedding parties also popped up, some under profane headings that would have made the Sex Pistols punk band proud. 

Some parts of the country just didn't seem interested; only one official bash was scheduled for Glasgow, Scotland's biggest city. 

In picturesque central London, however, the powerful desire to buy into the fairy tale was palpable. Prince William, who arrived at the Abbey wearing a red military tunic and an anxious smile, left in a horse-drawn carriage with his bride and a grin for the short trot to Buckingham Palace. 

A crowd estimated at a half-million people fell in behind the procession and marched down the Mall to the palace where, after an hour's wait, bride and groom sealed the day with a chaste kiss that didn't seem to satisfy the masses.

"It was a peck! It's weak," said Andrew Morrison, 30, a social worker originally from Athens, Ga. Some people even missed the kiss due to its brevity, leading to a chorus of "Kiss her again!" The couple obliged, the Royal Air Force flew overhead, and later the couple left in an Aston Martin convertible owned by the groom's father, Prince Charles. 

Yet for all the hubub, it wasn't impossible to avoid royal mania. As the crowd grew near Westminster Abbey Friday morning, Nobue and Toshihid Tanaka of Kyoto, Japan, and their eight-year-old daughter Risako strolled past St. Paul's Cathedral, site of Charles's 1981 wedding to Lady Diana Spencer. 

Initially worried that Will and Kate's affair would ruin their previously planned vacation, they had one of London's historic sites to themselves. They were hoping for similar luck at the National Portrait Gallery.

—Dana Cimilluca and Paul Sonne contributed to this article.

 Write to  David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com, Jeanne Whalen at jeanne.whalen@wsj.com and Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 