NEW DELHI – The World Bank Friday said it will lend nearly $2 billion to fund several projects in India, primarily rural road-building, underscoring the growing partnership between the multilateral lender and the world's second-fastest growing major economy. 

World Bank loans to India jumped to $11 billion in 2010 from an annual average of $3 billion in previous years as the country showed promise as a global growth engine. 

"The bank is pleased to support the government's efforts not just with finance, but by offering the development experience and technical knowledge the World Bank has gained around the world," World Bank Group President Robert Zoellick said Friday as he ended a five-day trip to India. 

The World Bank will lend $1.5 billion to build and develop 24,000 kilometers of rural roads in India. The poor quality of India's roads is often blamed for hurting economic growth and adding to inflationary pressure as fruits and vegetables rot on their way to markets. 

To boost its creaking infrastructure, India is building 375,000 kilometers of new roads and improving another 372,000 kilometers at a cost of $40 billion, including the World Bank loan. 

India, which is aiming for double-digit economic growth and a low inflation rate, has managed to develop 300,000 kilometers of roads since 2000. 

The latest road loan follows $45 million in technical assistance provided by the World Bank last month to boost India's national highways. These highways carry 40% of the country's road traffic, yet only 53% of the network is double-laned. 

The World Bank will also provide $255 million to support India's plan to strengthen an existing early warning system for cyclones in districts that dot the Asian peninsula's 7000 kilometer coastline. 

India is highly vulnerable to natural hazards, particularly earthquakes, floods, droughts, cyclones and landslides. Studies indicate that natural disaster losses total 2% of India s gross domestic product and up to 12% of federal government revenues. About 5,700 kilometers of India's coastline is exposed to severe cyclones and approximately 40% of India's population lives within 100 kilometers of the coast. 

"It [the project] highlights the strides India is making in moving from a reactive to an anticipatory approach to disaster and risk management," Mr. Zoellick said. 

The World Bank said it will also lend $171 million to help improve livelihood opportunities in the western state of Rajasthan. 

 Write to  Mukesh Jagota at mukesh.jagota@dowjones.com and Abhrajit Gangopadhyay at Abhrajit.gangopadhyay@dowjones.com 