The top 48 executives who saw mall owner  General Growth Properties Inc.
GGP


0.53
%




 through its 19-month bankruptcy got a rich reward: $181.5 million in cash bonuses.

The largest of the bonuses went to the former chief executive officer,  Adam Metz ($44.3 million), and to the former president and operations chief,  Thomas Nolan ($32.7 million).

General Growth's so-called Key Employee Incentive Program payments, approved by creditors and a bankruptcy judge, were crafted to retain top executives and induce them to guide the company's complex bankruptcy process. The payments were based on how well General Growth's creditors fared and on the value of its stock after the company exited from bankruptcy protection in November.

General Growth outlined the bonuses in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Tuesday. Its other top bonuses were $10.1 million to Chief Investment Officer  Joel Bayer and $7.1 million to interim finance chief  Edmund J. Hoyt.

Messrs. Metz and Nolan, former General Growth board members, took over as top executives in late 2008 and guided the company through bankruptcy and a $7 billion recapitalization as a standalone company. Ultimately, General Growth's bankruptcy, the largest ever for a real-estate company, yielded a full payment to creditors and leftover value for shareholders.

—Kris Hudson 

The William J. Clinton Foundation will soon be trading its Harlem offices for new digs in downtown Manhattan. 

The foundation expects to sign a 10-year lease in the coming weeks for about 25,000 square feet at 77 Water St. in Manhattan's Financial District, according to a person familiar with the terms. The foundation currently occupies about 19,000 square feet at 55 West 125th St. on a lease that expires this summer. 

The move comes even though former President Bill Clinton himself is expected to keep his own offices for another 10 years in the 14-story Harlem building. 

That lease, for 8,715 square feet on the building's top floor, was negotiated by the U.S. General Services Administration. 

Mr. Clinton's nonprofit opted to move its offices to cut costs and better accommodate growth, according to an e-mailed statement from  Laura Graham, the foundation's chief operating officer. "We're proud to have spent the better part of the last decade in Harlem, and look forward to contributing to the continued revitalization of the downtown area," Ms. Graham wrote. CB Richard Ellis represented the Clinton Foundation in its lease negotiations. 

—Maura Webber Sadovi 

Jonathan Rose Cos., a New York developer that focuses on affordable housing and "green" building, announced its third building deal in 60 days Tuesday, paying $18.5 million for El Granada at Sather Gate, a residential building with several brand-name retailers at ground level near a light-rail station in Berkeley, Calif. 

The acquisition closes out the company's $50 million Rose Smart Growth Investment Fund, which only buys properties near public transit. In another recent deal, Rose purchased the Yeon office building in Portland, Ore., for $8.9 million. 

Rose's plans typically involve adding green features such as eco-friendly lighting and water systems and holding on to the buildings for at least seven years. 

Last summer, the company teamed up with  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.34
%




 to raise $25 million for a similar fund focused on "greening" existing affordable residential projects in New Jersey. 

Rose's success at raising funds from investors has "proved out the thesis that people don't like commuting, and this comes at a time when there's pressure on fuel pricing once again," said  Wendy Rowden, a managing director with the firm. 

—Robbie Whelan