Tunisia's president fired his interior minister and set up a special commission to investigate the police response to nearly monthlong antigovernment protests that have destabilized this largely authoritarian country.

The capital, Tunis, was under curfew Wednesday night and soldiers were deployed across the center of the city after violence flared there for the first time during unrest that has left at least 23 people dead, officials said. The country's general trade union called a nationwide strike for Thursday.

Since December, daily protests by Tunisian university students, professional groups and artists—as well as angry rioters confronting well-armed police—have transfixed much of the Arab world. Observers have watched the demonstrations via Facebook and commented on Twitter feeds, despite some attempts by Tunisia's government to censor the flow of information.

The protests are stoking concern among other Arab leaders and prompting debate about the possibility of a domino effect. Many countries in the region also have authoritarian regimes and suffer from similar social and economic problems as Tunisia, including high youth unemployment, a lack of affordable housing and limits on political freedom.

Last week, in Algeria, crowds of young people rioted over rising food prices and concerns about jobs. On Tuesday, the Jordanian government attempted to pre-empt possible public outcry by cutting fuel taxes and imposing food-price controls. On Wednesday, Egypt's trade minister was quoted in local press as saying he ruled out a "Tunisia scenario" in his country.

Protests have been rare in Tunisia, which gained independence from France in 1956. President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali, who took power in a bloodless coup 23 years ago, has built up strong internal security and police agencies and outlawed most political opposition. The intensity of the demonstrations appears to have surprised his government. 

Over much of the past decade, Tunisia has seen healthy economic growth.The country's Mediterranean beaches are popular with European tourists, and it counts itself as a leader in the Arab world for promoting women's rights and education. But the government hasn't been effective in adapting to the global financial crisis, which has hit its tourism and manufacturing-dominated economy hard. The effects of the crisis have exacerbated the economic imbalances between coastal cities, such as Tunis, and the less-developed interior region, and cut job opportunities for skilled university graduates, according to  Lahcen Achy, an economist and scholar at the Carnegie Middle East Center in Beirut.

"With education comes expectations. The government has not been able to transform the economy to create the type of jobs to meet these expectations," said Mr. Achy. 

The Dec. 17 death of a young university graduate who was operating a vegetable stand triggered Tunisia's protests. Mohamed Bouazizi set fire to himself in Sidi Bouzid, 125 miles southeast of the capital, when local officials confiscated his stand for not having a permit.

Since then, protests have crossed class and tribal lines, with trade unions, famous artists and social organizations participating in antigovernment demonstrations.

"It struck a chord," says  Issandr el-Amrani, an Arab political commentator and blogger. "A lot of people are stuck in [his] situation."

Many of the protests have been violent and chants have specifically criticized the president. Government officials blame demonstrators for vandalizing government buildings and businesses. Demonstrators say they have been victims of police brutality. The government says 23 people have died in the clashes, while protest organizers put the number as high as 50.

Early in the week, the government appeared indecisive about how to deal with the unrest. On Monday, President Ben Ali spoke on national television and denounced the protesters as "terrorists." Security officials have said police opened fire only in self-defense.

The U.S. State Department on Tuesday issued a statement of concern about reports of disproportionate force. 

At midday Wednesday in Tunis, Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi announced the firing of Interior Minister Rafik Belhaj Kacem, and said most detainees arrested during the riots would be freed.

In a statement carried by the state news agency TAP, Mr. Ghannouchi said the president wanted to emphasize his desire for "dialogue and peaceful freedom of expression and association and for all parties to be involved in treating the questions of the nation." He also announced the creation of two inquiry commissions to probe "excesses committed during the troubles" and "the question of corruption and faults committed by certain officials.," the statement said. Officials said an emergency meeting of parliament would be held Thursday to discuss these matters.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 