KABUL—Afghan lawmakers and President Hamid Karzai moved closer to resolving the constitutional crisis over his order to delay the legislature's opening, though a tentative compromise worked out over the weekend could still unravel.

Averting a potentially violent showdown, lawmakers aborted their plans to inaugurate the parliament unilaterally on Sunday, a move that would have defied Mr. Karzai's orders for a monthlong delay.

Mr. Karzai, who cut short a trip to Russia to deal with the crisis, has told lawmakers that he would inaugurate the parliament on Wednesday instead, if his concerns about investigating fraud allegations during the Sept. 18 election are properly addressed. Negotiations are continuing over the exact wording of this compromise, Afghan officials and Western diplomats say.

"The two sides have come closer to each other, and they both seem to be interested in finding a solution," a Western diplomat said. "It's far too early to say who will emerge as a winner, and who will be the loser here."

Mr. Karzai, who has criticized the new legislature's makeup as unrepresentative because it doesn't give enough seats to the country's largest ethnic group, the Pashtuns, established last month a special court to investigate complaints of fraud made by the losing candidates. The court has said it has the power to order recounts and even annul the entire election.

Afghan election authorities, Western governments and the incoming lawmakers have rejected the special court as unconstitutional. The United Nations, backed by the U.S. and European countries, Friday expressed "deep concern" with Mr. Karzai's decision to delay the inauguration to give the special court more time for its inquiries, and called for seating the new parliament as soon as possible.

The U.N. envoy, Staffan de Mistura, who took an active role in mediating between Mr. Karzai and the lawmakers this weekend, said that the tentative deal worked out over the weekend was "a major step forward," and that he was "very hopeful" about the inauguration occurring on Wednesday.

"We have to close this situation," Mr. de Mistura said after meeting leading lawmakers Sunday in Kabul's Intercontinental Hotel. "We need to make sure that the parliament convenes, but it needs to be done with the agreement of everyone, and within the laws and constitution."

In a show of hands at the hotel's meeting room late on Sunday, the incoming parliamentarians approved a letter to Mr. Karzai, which they said was drafted with Mr. de Mistura's help. Without mentioning the special court, the letter says that lawmakers will accept the pursuit of criminal inquiries about fraud in the Sept. 18 election, in accordance with the constitution and other laws, and "with respect of parliament members' immunities and privileges."

The letter dropped an earlier demand for Mr. Karzai to dissolve the special court altogether. That issue caused heated debates among lawmakers, many of them suspicious that the president could use the special court, packed with his loyalists, to blackmail and possibly remove from office dozens of hostile parliamentarians. There are 249 members in the parliament's directly elected lower house.

Parliamentarians removed their demand from the letter only after the former parliament's speaker, Younus Qanooni, who has emerged as an influential leader of the new crop of lawmakers, made an impassioned call for compromise. "If we keep on insisting, then the inauguration will be delayed from Wednesday to Thursday, and then to Friday, and everything will remain unresolved," he said.

It remains to be seen, however, whether the letter's wording, approved by parliamentarians on Sunday, will be acceptable to Mr. Karzai. Western diplomats said the ball was now in the president's court.

"What they're trying to determine is the exact legal mechanism through which these criminal investigations of fraud could proceed," one diplomat said.

Though Mr. Karzai's minister for parliamentary affairs, Humayun Azizi, Sunday publicly discussed a possible parliament inauguration on Wednesday, the presidential palace so far has made no official statements about reversing last week's order for a monthlong delay.

"The issue is under discussion by the government, and we have not reached any agreement in this regard so far," an Afghan official said Sunday night.

Several of Mr. Karzai's key supporters in the previous legislature failed to win re-election and are hoping that continuing fraud investigations will allow them to gain seats if rivals are disqualified by the special court.

Losing candidates are scheduled to meet Mr. Karzai on Monday to voice their objections to the parliament's seating, said Daud Sultanzoy, who failed to win re-election in the eastern Ghazni province.

Many losing candidates have already called for street protests on Wednesday. "If this inauguration takes place, it will be seen by ordinary Afghans that the international community is giving its blessing to thugs and thieves," Mr. Sultanzoy said.

The confrontation with Mr. Karzai has solidified opposition to the Afghan president within the new legislature, and signaled that he could expect tough new scrutiny from the lawmakers in coming months.

"The president may have a little fear now," said parliamentarian Khaled Pashtun from the southern province of Kandahar. "The parliament this time may be more aggressive, more harsh, more decisive."

— and contributed to this article.



 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 