The key to surviving the madness of March, supposedly, is experience. Having senior leadership and players who have "been there before" is often the difference between the teams that wilt in the NCAA tournament and those that move on. 

This is college-basketball dogma. But this year's tournament, with a cascade of upsets of senior-laden teams and late-game blunders involving veteran players, is forcing a reevaluation. It might just be that experience is overrated.

What was stunning about last weekend's games wasn't the closeness of the games. (The average margin of victory in this year's round of 32, 10.4 points, is pretty typical.) It was how bizarre so many of the endings were. Short of calling a timeout with none remaining, teams seemed to find every imaginable way to lose a game: inexplicable fouls, missed free throws, forced shots, poor inbounds passing.

A further curiosity about that, though, is that many of the players involved were not neophytes, but upperclassmen.

Butler's Shelvin Mack and Pittsburgh's Nasir Robinson, whose unnecessary fouls caused wild swings in Butler's upset victory Saturday, are both juniors with extensive experience. Mack later called his foul, which occurred at mid-court with 1.4 seconds left and Butler up by one, "the dumbest mistake of my life." Pittsburgh's Gilbert Brown—who made the first subsequent free throw but missed the potential game-winning second—is a fifth-year senior.



Washington's Justin Holiday, whose pivotal inbounds pass was deflected and stolen in North Carolina's win, is another senior. So is Kansas State's Jacob Pullen, who played brilliantly against Wisconsin (38 points) but took an ill-advised three-pointer in the final seconds and got blocked, sealing the loss.

Beyond the late-game gaffes, there's the simple fact that the experienced teams aren't dominating. Actually, they're not even winning a majority of the time.

Through the first 52 games of this year's tournament, the less-experienced team in each of the matchups (as measured by college-basketball statistician Ken Pomeroy, on his website kenpom.com) has won 29 times, or 56%. Remove the games in which there's an obvious talent mismatch—the round-of-64 games involving 1-3 seeds—and the younger teams still have won 55% of the time.

Second-seeded Notre Dame, which had an all-senior starting lineup, was overwhelmed in the third round by Florida State, a moderately experienced 10th-seed whose star, Chris Singleton, hardly played. Sixth-seeded St. John's, a team with 10 seniors, lost its opener by 15 to a relatively young Gonzaga side.

This is not to suggest that experience is somehow a detriment in the NCAA tournament. Common sense says that players who've gone through a variety of pressure-packed scenarios have an edge over those who haven't, to speak nothing of the advantage they hold from having additional years of coaching and physical development. Coaches whose teams are full of tournament-experienced players are convinced it gives them an edge.

"I do think that," said Butler coach Brad Stevens, who felt secure enough in his team's savvy that, while trailing Pittsburgh by one with seven seconds left, drew up a play his players hadn't run before. "Our guys have run so many sets, they're used to looking at a board. They're used to applying the board to a court, even though there's the magnitude of the NCAA tournament."

But maybe experience simply isn't as big of an advantage as we assume it is. Of the 16 teams that are still alive, half rank below the 50th percentile nationally in player experience.

"It does help for a team to be tournament-tested, to know what to expect," said George Mason coach Jim Larranaga. During George Mason's shocking run to the Final Four in 2006 as a No. 11 seed, Larranaga said the Patriots beat North Carolina in part because their veteran big men were determined not to get outplayed by Tar Heels star Tyler Hansbrough, then a freshman.

That said, "every player is put into a position in the tournament where he has to make a lot of split-second decisions," Larranaga said. "The older guy, the senior, is often overly anxious because he knows it's his last chance. You saw Jacob Pullen at the end of the Wisconsin game—he was trying so hard that his decision-making was probably made more stressful because of what was at stake."

It's possible that experience is a greater factor in getting a school to the tournament than getting the team through it. This season, the most experienced team in each of the 32 Division I conferences had a cumulative .564 winning percentage in conference play. The least experienced team in each conference, by contrast, had a collective .407 winning percentage.

But the higher the level of play, the less experience seems to matter due to the presence of game-changing talent. Arizona, Connecticut, Kentucky and North Carolina, which have all reached the Sweet 16, all rank in the 20th percentile or below in experience nationally.

Memphis, which lost narrowly to Arizona in its tournament opener, went 3-0 in overtime this season and 13-2 in games decided by five points or fewer, defying the conventional belief that experience is critical in close games. "I think it can be a little overmagnified," said Memphis coach Josh Pastner. "This is a player's game. The players have to make plays."

To be sure, having veteran players is surely a boon, especially for smaller-conference schools. The five surviving mid-major teams—Brigham Young, Butler, Richmond, San Diego State and Virginia Commonwealth—all rank above the 70th percentile in experience. 

Still, "If you ask any coach, if you'd have to choose between a guy with experience versus a great player," said Larranaga, "you'd take the great player."

 Write to  Darren Everson at darren.everson@wsj.com 