A Russian tycoon with reputed political connections, a beautiful young French actress canoodling with her actor beau at a candlelit outdoor dinner overlooking the sea: One could be excused for thinking this exclusive beach resort is in St. Tropez or Malibu. But this is Koh Kood, or Kood island, a remote haven of rainforests, mangroves, waterfalls and pristine beaches in the southeastern part of the Gulf of Thailand, near the Cambodian border. 

Thailand's tourist industry has bounced back since last year's bloody Bangkok protests caused a dip in arrivals. Fresh waves of visitors are discovering the charms of islands previously known only to adventurous backpackers. Since the opening of its first five-star eco-resort, Kood island is becoming a favorite with paparazzi-fatigued pop stars and the rich and environmentally aware from Mumbai to New York, London, Frankfurt and Moscow. Further south in Thailand, the better-known pleasure isle of Koh Samui, a traditional haunt for young, party-hard, budget tourists, is transforming into a magnet equally popular with holidaymakers looking for an upscale beach experience.

Soneva Kiri (www.sixsenses.com/soneva-kiri) is on Thailand's fourth-largest, yet relatively undeveloped, island, part of the Koh Chang Marine National Park. Six Senses group unveiled its eco-hideaway on Kood island just over one year ago. Six Senses Chairman and Founder Sonu Shivdasani says in a phone interview from Shanghai, you can "leave your Manolo Blahniks and Jimmy Choos behind"; here even the uber-rich go barefoot in (designer) shorts and polos. Or as one New York guest says, what made her fall in love with this resort was its "rustic charm" and "shabby chic"—five-star style, of course. 

Mr. Shivdasani describes Soneva Kiri as "remote but accessible." And it is, if you take its swanky eight-seater private Cessna from Bangkok international airport. Guests are delivered within one hour to a private airstrip at a small island five minutes by boat from the resort entrance. The more circuitous, but cheaper, route starts with a Bangkok Airways flight to Trat. This is followed by a car ride for more than one hour to the Gulf, and a one-hour speedboat trip. The journey is not unpleasant, but it takes the better part of a day, thus dissuading many of the sun-starved tourists from northern Europe descending en masse on Thailand at this time of year. It is this relative inaccessibility that keeps Kood island the sleepy, pristine place it is. 

Soneva Kiri's 29 villas are mostly hidden in the subtly landscaped jungle foliage, and no neighboring resorts are in view. Guests can cocoon in the vast self-contained villas, with private pools and beaches, and the option of in-room dining and spa treatments. The spa offers an extensive menu of wellness services, from tamarind body polish, chakra balancing and Thai massage yoga to inner child healing and forgiveness therapy.

The pride of the sustainable resort is its zero-emissions "eco-villa." This green luxury prototype is built from local materials like rubber wood, stone, mud and coconut. The villa is energy self-sufficient thanks to its wind, water and solar-power systems. Waste water is recycled using gravity and a discreet reed bed, while the private swimming pool is cleaned simply by plants. 

Generally, everywhere in the resort lighting is minimal, and at this temperate time of year, none of the public areas of the resort use air-conditioning. Villas are built from local timbers and bamboo where possible or eucalyptus harvested from plantations and renewable pinewood. The resort reservoir stores all rainwater, drinking water is treated on the compound, there is no dry cleaning and the electric buggies that serve as the resort's chief mode of transportation are powered with solar energy. 

Does all of this amount to "intelligent" luxury by the beach, as Mr. Shivdasani says? Certainly, the added value is there for those willing to pay more for their green vacation, with subtle five-star frills, most evident in the food. 

The cuisine is traditional Thai, international and fusion. Dinner at the View, the dress-down, fine-dining restaurant, begins with a refreshing beetroot, pineapple and melon shooter. It is followed by peanut-crusted Australian lamb, with potato and mushroom massaman, crispy shallots and curry foam, aptly described by chef Adam Gaunt-Evans as "a great Thai dish, beautifully deconstructed." Sommelier Morris Dash has collected more than 450 labels from New Zealand Sauvignon Blancs and Rieslings to Italian reds and premium French Burgundys and Bordeaux, as well as Thai red blends from Khao Yai National Park. 

At the Dining Pod the brave-hearted can experience the spectacular views afforded by "tree pod dining" at five meters above ground in an "open cocoon" rattan tree house. Getting there requires using safety winches and dishes arrive in baskets attached to a cable. 

For a contrast to the calm of Kood island, sun seekers should opt for W Retreat Koh Samui (www.starwoodhotels.com/whotels), which opened a few months ago on Thailand's more well-known Koh Samui. The 75-villa resort is pitched at the global trendsetter with designer attitude and a penchant for partying. The motto is "day is for relaxing, night is for celebrating," and guests can choose from four bars—W Lounge on the beach terrace, SIP for sunset cocktails and dancing with live deejays, Woo Bar and Tonic Bar for the post-party recovery. SIP takes the prize for the most hallucinogenic nightspot in this neck of Samui. Its resin stools, reminiscent of a moonscape, glow at night in an array of psychedelic colors.

Another recent addition is the elegant Banyan Tree Koh Samui (www.banyantree.com/en/samui), which presents a less frenetic roster of social events for guests. Situated at Lamai Bay on the southeastern coast of the island, it offers 88 villas, built into the hill's terraces with a private pool each.At the Rainforest Spa, clients can undergo a series of hot and cold water therapies such as steam, "bucket drench therapy" and "ice fountain." 

For a total wellness vacation, an award-winning upmarket spa resort worth a look on Koh Samui is Kamalaya (www.kamalaya.com). Apart from the usual detox, yoga and massage, there is a strong spiritual element. The spa has its own prayer grotto, a cave that was formerly a Buddhist monk's retreat.