The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation owns Paul Gauguins and Pierre Bonnards, Marc Chagalls and Marcel Duchamps, but some of its 8,000 pieces of artwork hang steps from a shuttered strip club that once boasted a "bevy of delicious beauties."

The museum hasn't abandoned its Frank Lloyd Wright-designed home on Fifth Avenue. Rather, it is one of several major New York museums to house a good portion of its permanent collection in a clandestine Manhattan outpost.

The Guggenheim, the Whitney Museum of American Art and the Metropolitan Museum of Art all maintain off-site facilities containing many of the valuable paintings and sculptures responsible for their reputation.

The museums are tight-mouthed when it comes to these art warehouses. They all declined to give The Wall Street Journal access.

MUSEUM ADDRESS: 1071 Fifth

STORAGE LOCATION: Midtown

Works in permanent collection: 8,000*

*Number of pieces owned by Guggenheim foundation.

MAIN ADDRESS: 945 Madison Ave.

STORAGE LOCATION: Chelsea

Works in permanent collection: more than 18,000

MAIN ADDRESS: 1000 Fifth Ave

STORAGE LOCATION: Upper East Side

Works in permanent collection: more than two million

"The Met has never—not in my 18 years here, anyway—publicly discussed…its storage facilities, either on- or off-site," spokesman Harold Holzer said in response to a request for access to its warehouse. A spokeswoman for the Whitney said it "doesn't participate in stories on its storage facility mainly due to security issues."

But through interviews with current and former museum employees familiar with the sites, as well as property records and other public documents, the Journal can for the first time paint a landscape of New York's secret Museum Mile. To accommodate security concerns, addresses aren't being published.

The Guggenheim keeps its stash in a brick structure nestled among several auto mechanics and directly abutting the defunct "gentleman's lounge" on an exhaust-saturated stretch of Midtown.

The Met quietly maintains a six-story warehouse near the FDR Drive on the Upper East Side. Steps from a specialty-foods shop and a sports facility, the building hints at its art trove only via two small security cameras and a swipe-card mechanism installed on its exterior. Inside are pieces mainly from the Met's Modern holdings, a collection that includes works by Anish Kapoor, Chuck Close and Anselm Kiefer. Mr. Holzer declined to comment on information regarding the museum's off-site storage.

Disguised, too, is the Whitney's hulking, 60,000-square-foot West Chelsea storage facility.

Though it faces a building that houses several high-profile fashion and media companies, the Whitney's warehouse conceals its own glamorous contents. The only artwork visible from its concrete exterior is crude graffiti scrawled at street level.

Museums send their collections off site primarily because they suffer a shortage of on-site space. It's a particularly acute problem for the Whitney, which can display only 10% of its 18,000-piece permanent collection at any given time in its Madison Avenue home. That means much of its art resides in Chelsea.

Another reason for housing artwork off site is that it's a sort of insurance policy: A natural disaster, burglary or security breach affecting a museum's home won't jeopardize an institution's entire cache of paintings or sculptures.

"Many museums have a large collection and due to space constraints cannot hang or display each of the items, so a warehouse provides that safe haven and gives the museum peace of mind," said Robert Pittinger, director of underwriting for North America for AXA Art Insurance Corp.

The Met's warehouse contains an extra-large elevator for transporting over-sized works, as well as a mechanical core that maintains 70-degree temperature and 50% humidity—optimal conditions for preserving fine art, according to a person familiar with the facility. 

The Whitney stores paintings in a vertical filing system, with each work displayed upright and anchored on one side. Sculptures and other objects are stored in crates and on metal shelving.

Several years ago, the Whitney hired Advanced Electronic Solutions, a New York area security company, to upgrade its fire-detection system, installing monitors capable of identifying fire before the appearance of smoke, as well as preempting the sprinkler system since water poses a threat to the artwork.

The protective measures aren't always fail-proof. Several years prior to the Whitney's upgrade, when the Museum of Modern Art was utilizing an upper floor of the same building for its own art storage, a leak in MoMA's space compromised the Whitney's storage, according to a person familiar with the matter. MoMA's lease there ended in 2006, at which point it consolidated its storage in its Long Island City facility.

A MoMA spokeswoman confirmed the leak, but said she could not address its impact on the Whitney. A Whitney spokesman said he couldn't confirm the incident.

The museums have utilized these off-site facilities for decades.

The foundation that operates the Guggenheim took out a $2 million mortgage against its Midtown property in 1989, according to public records. A capital project completed in 1992 and overseen by Thomas Krens, the foundation's director until 2008, included "a new storage and technical services facility on New York's West Side," according to information available on the museum's Web site. 

Along with art storage the outpost now includes conservation, fabrications, preparation and photography departments, according to a person familiar with the matter.

As for the Met, the museum purchased the building in 1992 for slightly less than $2 million, according to property records and a person familiar with the matter. It began renovating the structure the following year, this person said, eliminating its windows, among other security measures.

The Met acquired the property as it embarked on plans for the renovation of its Greek and Roman galleries. The overhaul called for the destruction of some of the museum's on-site storage, so the Met sought replacement storage, according to this person.

The Whitney has used its Chelsea site since 1981, according to the museum's website; a 2006 renovation and expansion project added research and conservation areas.

In all of those years, few people not on the museums' payrolls have gained access.

"We are only able to accommodate viewings of artworks in our off-site storage facility in very select cases, for curators of other museums or scholars," the Guggenheim's website states. Requests for admission "will be evaluated upon the basis of relevance and need, as well as the availability and accessibility of the artworks."

In recent years, however, the Whitney has welcomed a slightly broader audience: the young patrons of a group known as the Whitney Contemporaries.

According to an event invitation, the Whitney opened the doors of its Chelsea storage "for the first time ever" to the Contemporaries on Nov. 17, 2009.

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 