With its face turned to the west, Bombay has always been India's most outward-looking, cosmopolitan city. The newcomer doesn't feel besieged there; he can blend in and find a job within days of arrival. Usually, at least, his language, creed, religion, or caste don't form barriers in a city whose sole yardstick of judging a person's worth is his ability to be commercially useful. 

Fiction writers have mined Bombay for its myths and legends. In the last quarter century alone, Salman Rushdie, Rohinton Mistry, and Vikram Chandra have written candidates for the Great Bombay Novel. Historians and other nonfiction writers usually describe Bombay in superlative terms. In 1982, Gillian Tindall called it the "city of gold." Suketu Mehta, in his 2004 opus, termed it "maximum city." 

Princeton historian Gyan Prakash jumps into this crowded fray to reveal "the historical circumstances portrayed and hidden by the stories and images produced in the past and the present." He turns his initial handicap—he wasn't born in Bombay, nor has he lived there—into an advantage, allowing his outsider's enchantment with the city to guide him on a quest for its hidden stories.

These stories contain many familiar elements references to Bollywood. But there are also unexpected discoveries. For instance, the author relates how the bubonic plague that devoured many in the 19th century was the consequence of the industrial revolution—the kind of capitalism that took root in the city.

What makes the book engrossing and particularly remarkable is its focus on culture at different ends of the spectrum. So we see the city's arts—not only the classiest paintings in tony galleries in the south of the city but also everyday billboards. We see books—not only academic histories, but also verses and fiction in Marathi and Gujarati, the two regional languages most at home here. And we see artistic performances—not only the progressive theater of the city's left-leaning intellectuals, but also the foot-stomping mass entertainment of Bollywood.

 By Gyan Prakash  Princeton, 384 pages, $29.95

Past accounts explaining the city's attractiveness have focused on all the ways of living that thrive here—manufacturing (textiles), services (finance), crime (gangsters), and entertainment (cinema). All of that is true. For instance, as global demand for textiles increased, local merchants built mills, hired workers from the countryside, and thrived on the boom in trade. Bombay's money made it the country's largest hub for movies—attracting youngsters from the hinterland who wanted to make it big in show business. 

But Mr. Prakash also shows us the underbelly, such as the workers' squalid living conditions that led to rampant spread of diseases. Dharavi, Asia's largest slum, only came into being—smack in the middle of the city—in the last few decades. Poor migrants came to Mumbai in search of livelihood, but the city failed to expand its infrastructure to meet their needs. Despite these odds, Dharavi is full of entrepreneurial energy—a thriving leather industry, for instance—a can-do spirit that he correctly points to. 

Mr. Prakash squarely blames capitalism—at least, as it was practiced in the Victorian era. And it doesn't matter how philanthropic that capitalist may have been. Bombay has erected a statue in memory of Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy, a Zoroastrian merchant, and his name graces the city's premier school of arts and a leading municipal hospital. But Mr. Prakash reminds us of his role in opium trade. 

As the novelist Amitav Ghosh showed in his 2008 novel, "Sea of Poppies," in the 19th century the trading links between China and India were smeared with opium, with Zoroastrian, Marwari and Gujarati traders from India procuring the crop grown in India, which the East India Company and others then exported to China. The author here takes a leaf out of the 2006 book "Opium City: The Making of Early Victorian Bombay," in which historian Amar Farooqui scuppered many conventional narratives.

But the work's real centerpiece is elsewhere. Bombay has experienced an uptick in anti-immigration sentiment over the past decade, thanks to the continued presence of an old Hindu-chauvinist party and the zeal of a new one. Taxi drivers emigrating from the north of India have been beaten up, and those not speaking the local Marathi language have been ostracized. 

Changing the city's official name to Mumbai is symbolic of this shift, which is why many Mumbaikars like myself decline to use the new name—and cringe when referred to as "Mumbaikars." Mr. Prakash excels in showing why such sentiment is alien to Bombay. Even though his book is called "Mumbai Fables" (and not Bombay Fables), he lets the old name prevail in the parts of the text that refer to an older time. That's a conscious choice he makes, as he celebrates the openness of the city's spirit.

The historian Ms. Tindall astutely observed: "For a while the largest city east of Suez till you came to Tokyo, and the largest in the British Empire after London, Bombay has just missed being a world capital." That once was true. But with the rise of China and India, Shanghai and Mumbai are legitimate aspirants of being the major commercial centers of this century. For that aspiration to turn reality, the openness of Mumbai can't be just a fable.

 Mr. Tripathi, a writer based in London, was born and grew up in Bombay, and was a correspondent in Singapore when the city became Mumbai. He is author of "Offense: The Hindu Case" (Seagull, 2009).  