A small electronic part that measures airflow to car engines is becoming a big worry for the auto industry in the wake of Japan's earthquake and tsunami.

The disaster has forced auto and parts plants throughout Japan to shut down.  General Motors Co.
GM


-1.01
%




,  Toyota Motor Corp. and  PSA Peugeot-Citroën have cut or are making plans to curb output of thousands of vehicles in the U.S. and Europe due to concerns about a shortage of critical parts made in Japan.

On Wednesday, Toyota warned employees it expects to halt some production in the U.S. and Canada as a result of shortages of parts from Japanese suppliers. "It is clear we will incur some non-production time," the company said in a memo. "The amount of non-production is still uncertain." 

One part coming under increased scrutiny goes into mass airflow sensors. Made by Hitachi Automotive Systems, a unit of Hitachi Ltd., at a plant north of Tokyo that was damaged by the quake and remains shut down, the electronic part is used by about a dozen auto makers. 

Hitachi, which has a 60% share of the world's market for airflow sensors, said it hopes to resume operations by Saturday, but isn't sure how much of its capacity will be restored by then. The area is suffering from water and power shortages.

The sensors cost about $90 each in retail stores. While supplies of the chip are still available and  Siemens AG and Robert Bosch GmbH also make airflow sensors, some auto makers are curtailing production out of fear that their supplies could run out.

GM, which uses Hitachi airflow sensors on several of its vehicles, has halted production of small pickup trucks at a plant in Shreveport, La. It made about 4,100 pickups at the plant last month. It also stopped some production Monday at plants in Eisenach, Germany, and Zaragoza, Spain, because of short supplies of the sensors.

"Supply-chain issues have arisen, and we are working with teams on both ends to make sure people are getting their parts, but I can't speak to that specific part," said  David Edwards, senior manager of human resources at Hitachi Automotive Systems in Harrodsburg, Ky. 

In France, Peugeot-Citroën was scheduled to reduce production at most of its European plants from Wednesday due to shortages of the airflow sensor. The reductions will affect production of the Peugeot 207, Citroën C3 and other models. 

The parts are flown in from Japan, and PSA normally only keeps 10 days' worth of supply, said a company spokeswoman. 

Production is being cut to between 40% and 50% of capacity at PSA's plants in Madrid and Vigo in Spain; Poissy and Aulnay in France; and Trnava in Slovakia. At Sochaux, Sevelnord and Mulhouse, all in France, production is being cut to 75% of the usual rate. 

PSA's plants in China and Latin America weren't affected because they use different engines and sensors, the spokeswoman said. 

Production at Hitachi's Sawa automotive-systems plant in Ibaraki Prefecture has been stopped since the day of the quake, March 11. The plant makes sensors, engine control and management parts. 

In addition to supplying GM and Peugeot, Hitachi also makes components for auto makers including  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.54
%




,  Renault SA, Nissan Motor Co.
NSANY


-0.65
%




, Toyota, and  Volkswagen AG.

Ford is also monitoring availability of sensor supplies "hourly" as it runs low on the same part, a person familiar with the matter said on Wednesday. Ford is feeling the crunch in Europe and the U.S., though it has yet to shut a plant in response to the situation. 

How auto makers are coping with parts shortages

 —Company reports 

"We've only seen the tip of the iceberg. We expect the greatest impact will be felt from the middle to the third week of April," said  Michael Robinet, a senior analyst with market research firm IHS Automotive. "It will be difficult for the world's vehicle manufacturers to escape the impacts by mid-April."

Quake-related shortages of silicon wafers, liquid-crystal display screens, chips, high strength steel and chemicals will affect the auto industry, he said. 

Auto makers keep different levels of supply of parts and a disruption in Japan might take three to four weeks to affect a U.S.-based manufacturing operation because ships carrying the parts, said  Mike Wall, who studies auto-parts suppliers for IHS Automotive. Based on that timeline, the last shipments made before the quake should arrive next week, he said.

Hitachi's spokesman declined to say if the company makes airflow sensors in any of its other plants besides the Sawa facility.

Airflow sensors aren't the only components that have auto makers concerned. Japan also produces LCDs used in car navigation systems, and microchips used to monitor fuel flow and other engine operations. But so far, auto makers have only pointed to airflow sensors as a cause of decreased auto production in plants outside of Japan.

Auto makers are partly insulated from the shut down of Japanese factories because the industry is highly regionalized. Most vehicles sold in North America, for example, are also made there as are most of the parts used in their manufacture. The same holds true in Europe.

In one example of how Japanese auto makers are responding to the disaster, Nissan is considering exporting more V6 engines from its Decherd, Tenn., plant to Japan because Nissan's Iwaki engine plant is still closed and is among the more damaged properties in the company's portfolio, said Nissan Motor spokesman  David Reuter.

He declined comment on whether the airflow sensor supply is a concern for its North American operations.

Nissan is currently running an incentive campaign to boost new-vehicle sales in the U.S., according to dealers who are participating in the program. Under the terms, dealers can get rebates of up $400 to $800 for each car they sell, provided they hit sales targets set by Nissan, these dealers said.

Without discussing the specifics of the program, Mr. Reuter said Nissan has no plans to pull back on the incentives to conserve its supply of models on lots. "We need to remain competitive and feel good about our current inventory," Nissan's Mr. Reuter said.

—Sharon Terlep and Juro Osawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Mike Ramsey at michael.ramsey@wsj.com and Sebastian Moffett at sebastian.moffett@wsj.com 