In the 17th century, the scientific revolution gave rise to a group of artists who dedicated themselves to depicting nature in all of its fine-grained particulars. In her new book "Art and Nature" (Greystone Books, 2011), Judith Magee provides a continent-by-continent survey of the development of natural-history art over the past 300 years, drawing from the vast collections of the Library of the Natural History Museum in London. Here is a look at some of the images.

 John Reeves arrived in Canton, China, in 1812 as an assistant tea inspector for the British East India Co. and soon began commissioning andcollecting natural-history illustrations. Though he found many skilled Chinese artists—a thriving market already existed for ornamental, highly stylized drawings for export to the West—they had no training in scientific accuracy, so Mr. Reeves provided his own instruction. This drawing of an Asian leopard cat, from the 1820s, combines the strong outlines and flat surfaces of traditional Chinese painting with the standards of scientific illustration, for the purpose of zoological identification.

 William Cornwallis Harris, a British military engineer for the East India Co., drew many scenes of animals and people on his expeditions through Africa. (He was also an avid hunter.) Believing that natural-history books often provided inaccurate drawings of large quadrupeds like zebras, the self-taught artist devoted his leisure time to making portraits of his own. "All of these figures of the zebra are excellent," he wrote in a note on his engraving above, from about 1838, "but they are on too large a scale." 

 John James Audubon is considered one of the greatest bird artists of all time, famous for his life-size depictions in "Birds of America" (1827-1838). His images broke new ground by portraying birds in their own habitat, often in flight or in pursuit of prey, as with this swallow-tailed kite holding a snake. (The bird eats the snake in flight.) His aim was not to help scientists in describing and identifying species but to give his viewers an awe-inspiring sense of American wildlife. 

 A number of men stationed with the British East India Co. became collectors of natural-history art. Thomas Hardwicke's collection included arthropod drawings with precise details, such as this tarantula by an artist only known as J. Hayes. 

 The British naturalist Mark Catesby spent 17 years putting together his pioneering "Natural History of Carolina, Florida and the Bahama Islands," published between 1731 and 1743. Mr. Catesby was the first to depict birds in association with the plants or animals they ate, as with this bird (believed to be a great blue heron) and salamander. He was an early champion of the idea that a good visual representation could convey more knowledge about a species than words alone.