ABU DHABI—Syria's government on Tuesday said it was continuing military operations in three areas across the country, as rights activists said those sieges and continued mass arrests threaten to cripple Syria's seven-week uprising.

Syrian state television said army units and troops were continuing to fight "armed terrorist groups" in the suburbs of Deraa in the south, Banias on the western coast and in the central city of Homs. The government has maintained that Syria has been subject to a foreign plot and that armed criminal groups have been killing civilians and attacking soldiers.

The army and security forces on Monday arrested "dozens of wanted men and seized a quantity of weapons, ammunition, and explosives intended for an attack on members of the army and security forces," according to a statement carried by the state news agency.

Despite the rising death toll from weeks of unrest, people across Syria continue to protest the government of President Bashar al-Assad. See events by day.

Track events day by day in the region.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

On Tuesday, European Union sanctions took effect against 13 Syrian officials who will be subject to a travel ban, asset freeze and arms embargo. The officials include Maher al-Assad, the brother of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and commander of the army's 4th division, as well as intelligence chief Ali Mamlouk and Interior Minister Mohammed Ibrahim al-Chaar. The president isn't among the sanctioned officials.

The sanctions extend to those the EU says are directly implicated in the regime's "violent repression" of demonstrators. It has said other Syrian leaders could be added if the regime doesn't change course.

Also Tuesday, diplomats said Syria was expected to withdraw its bid for a seat on the United Nations' Human Rights Council after intense diplomatic lobbying against Damascus. Syria was one of four countries contesting four Asia seats on the Geneva-based council that monitors human-rights violations, but diplomats said Kuwait has stepped forward to be the fifth candidate. Syria is likely to withdraw its candidacy rather than face a humiliating defeat, diplomats said.

Activists say Syria's government has moved steadily to crack down in areas across Syria where antiregime protests have been the largest and most sustained, starting with a military blockade of Deraa on April 25. On Monday, residents said tanks surrounded Maadamiyeh, a town in the suburbs of the capital Damascus. 

Syria's two largest cities, Damascus and Aleppo, haven't seen mass demonstrations, but university students in both cities have staged protests. "They can shoot us, detain us, do whatever they want, but we're going to keep trying," a young activist in Aleppo said by telephone. 

The activist said some 2,000 students at Aleppo University had planned to take to the streets around their campus Monday night but that security and intelligence forces averted their march. "Our plan was leaked to them, and they instead raided our campus," he said. "We failed yesterday because of the breadth of the security forces."

About 500 women protested Monday in Banias, despite door-to-door home raids and the detention of 1,700 people in the city over the last three days, according to Rami Abdel Rahman, head of the London-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which has a team in Damascus tracking events across the country. Detainees are being held in a giant soccer stadium, he said, while electricity and telecommunications—which have been cut off for several days— are being turned on intermittently.

On Tuesday, 22 people were detained in home raids in two Damascus suburbs, Mr. Abdel Rahman said.

Syria's leadership has blocked journalists from reporting on the protests, and witness reports have been reduced by clampdowns on power and communications in protest centers. 

A video posted on YouTube shows what appears to be intelligence officers harassing and breaking up a small protest on Monday in Arnous, a central area of the capital, where people walked hand-in-hand singing and chanting.

The video shows a plainclothed man trying to grab a young, veiled woman by the hand. She pushes him away forcefully and asks him to speak to her respectfully. "Everybody back to business," the man says in the video, waving his arm at the surrounding group. The video later shows several plainclothed men shoving other men, who try to resist, into a van. The video couldn't be independently verified.

"We've entered a dangerous period," said Mr. Abdel Rahman. "I'm not totally optimistic—this coming week will be decisive," he said. 

Large protests are usually planned for Friday, when groups gather after the Islamic prayer. Activists say countrywide protests last Friday drew about one-third as many people as the previous Friday's demonstrations, but had farther reach as people from new towns and Bedouin groups joined the protests.

Amnesty International said Monday that "draconian measures" on entire cities in Syria aimed at stamping out opposition to the regime killed 48 people in the four previous days. "Killings of protesters are spiraling out of control in Syria," said Philip Luther, Amnesty's deputy director for the Middle East and North Africa.

Deraa, where major protests started in mid-March, remains "cut off from the world" due to a heavy security and intelligence presence, Mr. Abdel Rahman said. Electricity has been restored to the city, but activists said many cellular and satellite phones inside the city have been confiscated by security forces. The military this week moved into Deraa's surrounding towns and villages, including Inkhil and Jassim, where people continue to demand an end to Deraa's siege, according to activists.

The government last Thursday said it had begun a gradual withdrawal of the army from Deraa following an 11-day siege that left residents without power or water. Attempts to reach residents there have been unsuccessful since Friday.

Syria's protests began in mid-March when school-aged children in Deraa were jailed for scrawling antiregime graffiti on the walls of their Ba'ath Party school. The Ba'ath Party has monopolized political life in Syria since 1963. 

— Laurence Norman in Brussels and Joe Lauria at the U.N. contributed to this article.

 Write to  Nour Malas at nour.malas@dowjones.com 