MUMBAI—India's largest private-sector lender by assets, ICICI Bank Ltd., posted a nearly 31% increase in net profit, exceeding analysts' expectations as loan-loss provisions fell sharply. 

Loan growth lagged behind the rest of the industry. The New York-listed bank, which led other Indian lenders in aggressively targeting retail customers as economic growth took off early this century, had cut back on retail lending as the global financial crisis of the past two years eroded the repayment capabilities of many borrowers.

Starting in 2008, the bank was hit by an avalanche of bad loans because of the rapid growth in its portfolio of unsecured, personal and credit-card loans, which prompted it to reduce unsecured lending and shift to mortgages and car loans. 

The retail loan portfolio has been rising more slowly than at other banks for two years, but  Chanda Kochhar, the bank's chief executive officer and managing director, said via a conference call that it would keep pace with the industry in the fiscal year starting in April.

"We are seeing broad-based and diversified demand for loans from different quarters, be it housing loans, car loans, loans for working capital requirements, infrastructure and manufacturing project loans or loans for small and medium-sized companies," she said.

Retail loans outstanding rose slightly in the quarter ended in December to about 790 billion rupees ($17.32 billion), Ms. Kochhar said.

She said that while the bank would clock about 18% rise in loans outstanding in the financial year through March, the expansion should increase to 20% in the next financial year.

During the quarter under review, loans issued rose 15% from a year earlier, much slower than the 24% increase Indian banks as a group achieved in 2010. Growth also was slower than the 20% forecast for the whole financial year by the Reserve Bank of India.

Net profit in the quarter rose to 14.37 billion rupees from 11.01 billion rupees a year earlier. The average forecast among six analysts surveyed was for a net profit of 13.45 billion rupees.

Quarterly provisions for potential loan losses, which more than halved to 4.64 billion rupees, saved the day for the bank in the absence of core income growth.

Nonperforming loans, net of loans that had been classed as nonperforming but later were repaid, fell to 1.39% of total loans from 2.43% a year earlier. 

Net nonperforming loans by 35% to 28.73 billion rupees from 44.16 billion rupees a year earlier, as the bank's policy to concentrate on the quality of lending, rather quantity, paid off.

The lender's shares jumped 1.7% to 1083.90 rupees. The Bombay Stock Exchange's benchmark Sensitive Index rose 0.8%..

Net interest income, or the difference between interest earned and interest paid, rose 12.3% from a year earlier to 23.12 billion rupees in the quarter, while fee income climbed 14% to 16.25 billion rupees.

In contrast, its larger rival, State Bank of India on Saturday posted a more than 43% surge in net interest income for the quarter.

ICICI's net interest margin, or the difference between lending rates and the cost of funds, stayed at the 2.6% registered both in the year-earlier period and in the previous quarter.

Ms. Kochhar said the bank would aim to maintain its margins at current levels even though the Reserve Bank of India is expected to increase interest rates to fight food-price inflation. 

Not all of the bank's 2,512 branches have reached their potential in terms of gathering deposits, she said. As deposit totals rise, giving the bank a low-cost source of funds, that should help keep margins at current levels despite the rising cost of loans from the Indian central bank, the CEO said. 

 Write to  John Satish Kumar at john.kumar@dowjones.com 