TOKYO—Japan's Finance Ministry is being increasingly vigilant against the yen's rise a day after it jumped to a record high against the U.S. dollar, with an intervention to weaken the currency a possibility. 

The ministry is "prepared for battle," according to a person familiar with the matter, after the yen jumped to a record high in late U.S. trade Wednesday, with the dollar falling to 76.25 yen. In midday trade in New York on Thursday, the yen weakened to 78.81 against the dollar.

Finance Minister  Yoshihiko Noda is set to have a teleconference with the Group of Seven finance ministers later Thursday. There is a view within the ministry that, with Japan's economy suffering from the aftermath of last week's earthquake, tsunami and nuclear crisis, the G-7 likely wouldn't complain even if Tokyo intervened to sell the yen—should the action aim to curb excessive volatility, another person familiar with the matter said.

The Finance Ministry isn't certain to intervene in the market. 

Mr. Noda refrained Thursday from his usual mantra that the government will take "decisive steps"—seen as code for intervention—if it sees too much volatility in the yen's exchange rates. Japan's need for imported goods such as oil, food and other materials to save lives or reconstruct the northern areas devastated by the quake has also raised speculation among currency traders that Tokyo may keep its hands off the market. 

But there have been signs that ministry bureaucrats, along with the rest of the government, are watching the yen increasingly carefully. One reason is that the yen has become highly sensitive to every turn of events at the crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power station. Bad news such as an electricity firm's failures to address problems there tend to drive the yen higher, as the currency is considered a safe-haven asset, while good news eases upward pressure on the yen. 

A sense of urgency has grown at the Finance Ministry since the quake. The ministry, for example, kept its Foreign Exchange Market Division—a section charged with executing intervention—staffed last weekend even though markets were closed, according to government officials. 

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 