Ohio's legislature is on track to become the first to pass a law prohibiting public-employee unions representing 400,000 state and local workers from bargaining over health benefits and pensions, while also eliminating the right to strike. Ohio is larger than Wisconsin, where Republican Gov. Scott Walker is fighting for a similar bill, and, like Wisconsin, a stronghold of public-sector labor unions and a swing state in national elections. In Wisconsin, Walker presented a two-year budget cutting more than $1.25 billion in state aid to schools and local governments.

Cost-cutters with numbers at their fingertips moved to slim government: 

More than half the states in the U.S. are seeking federal permission to remove hundreds of thousands of people from the Medicaid insurance program for the poor, setting up a conflict with the Obama administration. Nearly every state has nipped at parts of Medicaid, which currently insures 53 million Americans, but governors say those cuts aren't enough to control a program that swelled during the economic downturn and is now tied with education as their top expense. 

On the housing front, just one in four of the 2.7 million homeowners who sought to participate in the Obama administration's signature mortgage assistance program have succeeded in getting their monthly payments reduced. House Republicans considered a bill this week to end the program. 

Rounds of black-powder cartridges each of the 200 participants were asked to bring to this weekend's 175th anniversay re-enactments of the fighting at the Alamo.

Attorneys who have withdrawn from representing the University of Alabama fan accused of poisoning two historic oaks at rival Auburn University. A fourth attorney took the case.

Increase in U.S. hourly wages since the economic recovery began, adjusted for inflation.

The labor market may be improving, but U.S. workers have yet to share much in the profits they've helped generate during the recovery. From mid-2009 through the end of 2010, output per hour at U.S. nonfarm businesses has risen 5.2% as companies get more out of their existing staffs. Most of that gain has gone to stockholders as record profits; companies have shared only 6% of productivity gains with their workers, Labor Department data suggest. That compares with 58% since records began in 1947 and is the least workers have gotten in a recovery since the early '80s. On the bright side, the economy isn't yet seeing the wage and price increases that typically augur runaway inflation. But that might not be much consolation on payday.

 —Mark Whitehouse 

 Sources: San Antonio Living History Assn. (Alamo); AP (oaks).  

A massive study of duplication from the nonpartisan Government Accountability Office, whose details were disclosed by the Journal Monday, had House and Senate leaders of both parties promising to rein in government spending. It found that the federal government has 15 agencies overseeing food-safety laws, more than 20 separate programs to help the homeless and 80 for economic development, including 47 for job training and employment. The states aren't off the hook: A new study said many of the budget deficits that blindsided them—and sparked emergency tax increases and spending cuts—stem in part from rosy revenue forecasts. 

House Speaker Boehner said he was determined to offer a budget this spring that curbs Social Security and Medicare despite the political risks.

The First Amendment protects free speech even if it is as hurtful as signs at a Marine funeral proclaiming "Thank God for Dead Soldiers," the Supreme Court ruled 8-1. Last April, in another 8-1 ruling, the court struck down a law banning animal-cruelty videos as too broad. Together, the rulings show a consensus on the court spanning the frequent liberal-conservative ideological divide. Alito was the dissenter in the rulings. 

The U.S. and Mexico unveiled a deal to resolve a longstanding dispute over cross-border trucking, an agreement that could help ease tense relations between the two neighbors. The deal seeks to end a nearly 20-year ban on Mexican trucks crossing the U.S. border. 

Brisk hiring in February pushed the U.S. unemployment rate below 9% for the first time in nearly two years. 

Women are gaining ground educationally and economically but still make much less money than men and are likelier to live in poverty, according to a White House report. Across educational levels, women made on average 75% as much as their male counterparts in 2009. 

Rebel forces battled pro-Gadhafi troops across Libya, with the government controlling western outposts and rebels holding oil-refinery towns in the east. Calls from the U.S. and elsewhere mounted for Gadhafi to step down, and the Obama administration moved to freeze around $30 billion in Libyan assets. But as migrant workers and others fled the country and fear and arrests mounted in the capital, senior U.S. defense officials tried to lower expectations of an international military intervention, though stepped-up strikes by the dictator's air force may change the international calculation.

Egypt's premier resigned and was succeeded by a U.S.-educated former transport minister supported by the opposition, meeting a major demand of the protest movement that toppled Mubarak. The move shows how Middle East protests are exhibiting startling staying power as they demand real and not just cosmetic changes in response to their demands. Yemen's president and opposition members agreed to a deal opponents said gives the president until year's end to work out a framework for his exit and that would rule out handing down power to his son. Political unrest has sent stock markets tumbling across the Middle East and is threatening economic growth and the employment prospects of populations already hungry for better jobs. 

A fund run by  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.07
%




 opened talks with Twitter to buy a minority stake in the microblogging site. The investment, which is expected to value the company at more than $4 billion, will be made from the bank's digital growth fund. Over at  Apple,
AAPL


0.91
%




 CEO Jobs, who took a medical leave in January, was the surprise MC as the company showed off the thinner, faster iPad 2 tablet computer. The iPad has created a multi-billion-dollar business in less than a year. And  Google said it was getting a positive response from websites as they retool themselves to adapt to its new standards for ranking sites in search results. 

The Obama administration approved the first deep-water drilling permit since last year's Gulf of Mexico oil spill, amid rising political and legal pressure to reopen the Gulf to oil exploration as crude prices spike. Houston-based  Noble Energy
NBL


-1.14
%




 was the recipient. 

Fashion house Christian Dior began dismissal procedures against designer  John Gallianofor making "deeply offensive" anti-Semitic remarks during a late-night row in a trendy Paris bar. Making anti-Semitic slurs is illegal and punishable by up to six months in prison under French law. The designer issued an apology for his remarks.

About 37.6 million viewers, or 9.9% fewer than last year, tuned in to the Academy Awards on ABC, reversing two years of growth for one of television's biggest events. Organizers set out to woo a more youthful audience with co-hosts  James Franco, 32, and  Anne Hathaway, 28, to mixed reviews.  ﻿
CBS.A


0.16
%




 

The U.S. accused  Rajat Gupta, a former director of Goldman Sachs and  Procter and Gamble,
PG


0.17
%




 of passing along inside information about the two companies—sometimes the same day he got it—to hedge-fund master Rajaratnam of Galleon Group. In the most incendiary allegation, the SEC said Gupta tipped Rajaratnam to a $5 billion investment in Goldman by  Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway before a public announcement of the deal at the height of the financial panic. 

The SEC is probing U.S. banks that have restructured troubled loans to make them look healthier, including a practice known as "extend and pretend," in which a bank gives a borrower more time to pay off a loan and accounts for it irregularly. 

Stocks rose slightly on the week as traders weighed worry about rising energy prices against signs that the job market is improving. The Dow industrials declined 88.32 points to 12169.88 Friday as crude-oil futures prices closed at the highest since Sept. 26, 2008, spurred by the unrest in the Middle East and North Africa. The front month crude-oil futures contract rose $6.54 a barrel to $104.42 on the week. Crude has risen 24% since hitting a 2011 low of $84.32 on Feb. 15.