LONDON—The world has become increasingly vulnerable to food crises in the wake of the global financial crisis and the commodity boom of 2007-08, the United Nations' food body said Monday. 

In its flagship report, the Food and Agriculture Organization said while world food prices fell after spiking in 2008, they remain elevated and volatile, a situation likely to continue owing to rising production costs, growing demand from biofuels and pressure on supplies from a rapidly-expanding population. 

"The experience of the food price and financial crises have provided a sharp reminder of the vulnerability of world food security to shocks in the global food system and the world economy," said the report. 

Some food prices have more than doubled this year after weather problems in key producers curbed the global production of wheat, corn, cotton and sugar. The FAO's food-price index rose 2.2% on month in February, the eighth-consecutive monthly rise, to the highest level in real and nominal terms since the FAO started monitoring prices in 1990, according to data from the body. 

Charities warn the rising cost of staple foods could push the number of chronically-hungry people in the world above 1 billion, as happened in 2009. 

"Millions more people are sliding into poverty as they struggle to afford basic food supplies and more and more are at risk of going hungry," said Oxfam's food-policy adviser  Thierry Kesteloot. 

The FAO report said that with global food consumption outpacing supply, "prices are projected to increase over the next decade and to continue to be at levels, on average, above those of the past decade." 

World food production, as measured by the FAO's production index, is forecast to have grown 0.8% in 2010 after rising 3.8% in 2008 and 2.6% in 2007, as producers responded to the high prices of the food crisis. 

Global food consumption, which has been rising at an average of around 2% a year, was only marginally dented by the recession, the FAO said. Trade in food is expected to have contracted again in 2010 after increasing 4%-6% annually before the financial crisis. 

"Episodes of high prices are detrimental to food security, and the high uncertainty associated with price volatility affects producer viability and may lead to reduced agricultural investments," said the report. 

Problems such as climate change are also expected to leave markets more vulnerable to shocks: the number of Asian countries affected by food crises doubled from five a year in 1981-2002 to 10 in 2003-2009, for example. 

"Since the mid-1980s, the general trend has been towards an increase in the number of countries affected by emergencies," the report said. 

In the face of such growing pressure, the FAO said governments must boost investment in agriculture. It highlighted that closing the gender gap in agricultural production by empowering women could potentially boost developing countries' output by 2.5%-4% and feed an extra 100-150 million starving people. 

"The recent food and financial crises, the uncoordinated policy responses and continuing fears over global food-market turmoil have underscored the need for action by the international community," it said. 