Itzhak Perlman doesn't drink wine every day, but when he does, it's never anything less than great: a grand-cru Burgundy, a first-growth Bordeaux or perhaps a Brunello. In fact, I suspect the only blemish on the famed violinist's otherwise-perfect drinking record may be the afternoon a few weeks ago when I bought the wine.

We had arranged to meet for lunch at Lincoln restaurant on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, located next to Lincoln Center's Avery Fisher Hall, where Mr. Perlman performs with the New York Philharmonic. Lincoln is also just a few blocks from his home. 

We were seated next to a window that overlooked the Julliard School, where Mr. Perlman teaches an occasional class, and handed glasses of Ferghettina Brut, an Italian sparkler. The wine list came next. "They only have Italian wine," exclaimed Mr. Perlman, sounding dismayed. "But you've been here before—" I said, and almost added, "Didn't you know?" but stopped myself. It didn't seem right to reproach a musical genius or, for that matter, a luncheon guest.

 Favorite Bottle:  

 1982 Château Haut-Brion 

This was the wine that launched Mr. Perlman's love affair with Bordeaux. He has a magnum of this great first-growth Bordeaux in his cellar right now.

 Favorite Producer:  

 Manfred Krankl 

Mr. Perlman is a big fan of the flamboyant Sine Qua Non wines made by this talented California producer.

 Biggest Corkage Fee:  

 $1,400  

Mr. Perlman likes to bring his wine along to restaurants and he often has to pay a corkage fee. This fee (for a few bottles) is the biggest he's ever paid (at a New York restaurant he'd rather not name).

"I never order from the wine list," said Mr. Perlman, as if in response to that unspoken question. "I always bring my own wine." Why hadn't he brought anything this time? "I wasn't sure we would drink it—I was thinking of bringing a dessert wine. I love dessert wine," said Mr. Perlman. "I also thought about bringing a bottle of 1982 Trotanoy," he said, naming a great vintage of a great Bordeaux. "I wish you hadn't told me that," I said in mock lament. "I could go home and get it." Mr. Perlman gallantly offered. I considered offering him cab fare but decided that might not be a gracious response (or a fair trade: $10 for the taxi versus his $500 treasure). 

"I collect both Bordeaux and Burgundy," Mr. Perlman said. "To me, they're like two types of violins. The Stradivarius is Burgundy and the Guarneri is Bordeaux." I'd heard lots of characterizations of the two wines over the years (i.e., Burgundy is for sensualists and Bordeaux for intellectuals), but the violin analogy was a first. For the record, Mr. Perlman plays both—a 1734 Guarneri and a 1714 Stradivarius once owned by Yehudi Menuhin.

I had once heard musical instruments compared to grapes. A few years ago at Château de Beaucastel, the famous Châteauneuf-du-Pape domaine, the estate's tasting director had put together an elaborate presentation comparing each of the 13 Châteauneuf-du-Pape grapes to 13 different instruments. "He said Grenache was the violin," I recalled; did Mr. Perlman agree? "Grenache is more like chocolate to me," he said.

"Manfred Krankl makes an amazing Grenache," Mr. Perlman added, naming a California producer who makes tiny amounts of much-sought-after wines under the label Sine Qua Non. "Do you know his new wine, Next of Kyn?" he asked, naming a recent release that was offered to a handful of mailing-list customers for the cool price of $1,110 (a three-bottle, one-magnum pack.) Alas, I had never tasted it, I told Mr. Perlman.

Lincoln's sommelier, Aaron Von Rock, returned to see if we'd chosen a wine, but we had yet to look at the list at all. "Let's see what Abraham used to drink," Mr. Perlman said, turning the pages. Who was Abraham, I wondered, before I realized who he meant: Abraham Lincoln. Mr. Perlman, it seemed, liked to tell jokes; he was particularly fond of a well-crafted pun.

"What Brunellos are on the list?" asked Mr. Perlman. "I had a 1997 Soldera once," he said, naming a superstar Brunello producer. "Actually, I've never had an Italian wine made after 1997." I turned to the Brunello page. The 2002 Soldera was $505 a bottle. Two other vintages ('03 and '04) cost $525 and $650, respectively. All three were thankfully much too young to fit Mr. Perlman's pre-1997 parameter, which spared me the awkwardness of demurring on price. 

"What about a wine you've never had before?" I suggested brightly, turning the page. "Perhaps a Pinot Nero? After all, it's from the same grape as Burgundy." I scanned the possibilities. The 2007 Hofstädder Barthenau S. Urbano Pinot Nero was a comparative deal at $125 a bottle. "It's from a top producer and a great vineyard in the Alto Adige region; the wine can be quite Burgundian."

Mr. Perlman looked dubious but agreed to give it a try. Then he told a few stories about his appearances on cooking shows—it seemed he was also a virtuoso cook. ("I took lessons for years.") He shared the ingredients of "a really good fennel salad"—lemon juice, olive oil, dill and salt. "The combination transforms it. I got the recipe from a friend."

Mr. Von Rock returned with our wine. It was fragrant and attractive but rather light-bodied, with a fair amount of acidity and tannin. At least, I thought, it would go well with the food. "It's a good luncheon wine," pronounced Mr. Perlman. He was right: It was Good but Not Great. I felt a guilt pang. What had I been thinking? Clearly I should have sprung for the Soldera.

But Mr. Perlman kept drinking the wine. "It's getting better," he said a couple of hours later. I felt like a student who had managed not to mangle the Kreisler Liebesleid. What made a great musician, anyway? I asked. "Complexity," replied Mr. Perlman. "Complexity of the sound." How was that achieved? "I think you have to know how to listen," said Mr. Perlman. "Teaching is such an important part of being an artist. The person who is able listen will always be the better player."

Mr. Von Rock returned to our table. Would we like dessert?" "Fresh fruit," said Mr. Perlman. I saw that the 2010 Saracco Moscato d'Asti—my favorite Moscato, from a excellent producer—was offered by the glass ($10). Had Mr. Perlman ever tasted a Moscato d'Asti? He had not. I ordered two glasses. "This is probably the cheapest wine you'll ever have," I said as we each took a sip of the light, fruity, frothy, delicious, apricot-inflected wine. "This is good," said Mr. Perlman. "It goes with the fruit."

Mr. Perlman knew all about greatness. But perhaps I could tell him about what was good.

Four good (and mostly moderately priced) wines that Mr. Perlman has enjoyed—and one I think he'd like

A plump red Bordeaux with soft tannins (it's about 90% Merlot), made in small quantities (about 2,500 cases) and harvested by hand. Mr. Perlman tried it at New York's Restaurant Daniel, where it's priced at $65 on the wine list. 



There aren't many Italian Pinot Neros (Pinot Noir) of note, but Hofstätter's single-vineyard wine from Alto Adige has always been one. It's a fairly light, bright red; the tannins are a bit tight, but it opens with time. As Mr. Perlman said, "It's a good luncheon wine."





This wonderfully elegant, dry, almost austere sparkling Italian wine comes from the Franciacorta region of Lombardy. Made almost entirely from Chardonnay (95%), it's bright and lively—a lovely aperitif. Mr. Perlman and I enjoyed a glass before our lunch.





The word "great" is rarely, if ever, applied to Moscato d'Asti, but the word "delicious" would not be amiss in describing this light, bright, slightly fizzy white with notes of pear and white flower from one of the best Moscato producers in Piedmont. It's the perfect dessert all by itself or with a plate of fruit.



The late, great Austrian winemaker Alois Kracher was famous for his dessert wines, so this would be a good bet for Mr. Perlman, a dessert-wine lover. The winery, now under the control of Mr. Kracher's father and son, is still turning out sumptuous and sweet examples like this blend of Chardonnay and Welschriesling.