Derek Jeter was long gone from the Yankees' clubhouse, but the screen on the laptop in his locker showed exactly what was on his mind when he left. It was a Doppler radar, showing a nasty patch of rain over the Stadium. 

Indeed, no one was surprised when the announcement came around 7 p.m. on Tuesday that the Yankees' game against the Baltimore Orioles had been washed out. 

The Bronx had soaked under a steady downpour for most of the day, with more to come in the evening. The Yankees, who have two more games scheduled against the Orioles during this homestand, did not set a date for the makeup game. 

It was the second home rainout in a week for the Yankees after going without one for the entirety of the 2010 season.

Manager Joe Girardi said that the rainout would not have a major impact on his plans for the rotation, with A.J. Burnett— Tuesday's scheduled starter—due to face the Orioles on Wednesday. Phil Hughes is due to pitch on Thursday. 

After that, Girardi will have to decide whether to use Ivan Nova or give Freddy Garcia, who appeared in relief against Boston, his first start of the season. 

A far bigger concern for Girardi was relief pitcher Pedro Feliciano's nagging rotator cuff injury. Feliciano "did not do well" when he played catch Tuesday. Girardi said, and was due to have another MRI on Wednesday. 

—Joshua Robinson

Daniel Murphy appears to be gaining the trust of Mets manager Terry Collins. Before Tuesday's game against the Colorado Rockies was postponed due to rain, Collins had slated Murphy to start at second base and hit second in the order. It would have been Murphy's second straight start in place of Brad Emaus. 

Murphy went 1-for-5 in Monday's 7-6 loss to the Rockies and made a couple of fine defensive plays. Collins stopped short of saying that the 26-year-old Murphy had earned a platoon role. "I haven't gone down that road," Collins said.

Tuesday's rainout will be made up as part of a doubleheader on Thursday starting at 12:10 p.m. The Mets' Jonathon Niese (0-1, 6.55 ERA) is scheduled to pitch against the Rockies' Esmil Rogers (1-0, 1.23 ERA) on Wednesday. R.A. Dickey and Chris Capuano are scheduled to pitch for the Mets on Thursday.

—Scott Cacciola