No effort to roll back last year's Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law has progressed further than the banking industry's campaign to delay new fee limits on debit-card transactions.

The draft version of the rule would prohibit large banks from charging merchants more than 12 cents each time a customer pays with a debit card, down from the current average of 44 cents.

The banks, which stand to lose billions in revenue if the rule takes effect, have been aided in their effort by a collection of strange bedfellows who have raised concerns that the rule could have unintended consequences, harming consumers and even small banks, which are exempted from the rule.

  Ben Bernanke, chairman of the Federal Reserve, which drafted the proposed rule, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Chairman  Sheila Bair have expressed concerns.

"The costs and benefits were not perhaps as thoroughly explored as they should have been," Ms. Bair said in an interview Tuesday. Merchants say they would pass on their reduced costs to consumers in the form of lower prices, which Ms. Bair doubts.

"I'm not sure that's going to happen, and if it does happen, the benefit would be so tiny to most retail customers," Ms. Bair said.

The latest organization to join the coalition of opponents to the rule is the National Education Association, which said Monday that the rule should be studied further because, though well-intentioned, it could raise the cost of banking services.

"We really are concerned about some of the unintended consequences, particularly to lower-income educators," said  Alfred Campos, a lobbyist for the education group, in an interview.

Those concerns follow similar entreaties from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, which urged further study of the rule to ensure it doesn't hurt poor and minority consumers by making banking services unaffordable. Big Wall Street banks and small community banks, which fought on opposite sides of many issues during the Dodd-Frank debate, are united on this one.

Helped along by these outside influences, bipartisan teams of lawmakers introduced legislation in both the House and Senate last week to delay the start date of the proposed debit-fee rule, which takes effect in July. These aren't the first attempts to roll back Dodd-Frank, but the debit-fee measure is the first to gain traction in the Senate.

Introduced by Montana Democrat Jon Tester, the Senate bill still faces challenges. Mr. Tester and his supporters also would have to overcome the immovable opposition of Sen. Richard Durbin of Illinois, who authored the "swipe-fee" rule and holds the No. 2 Democratic leadership position.

The current debit-fee system is "unfair to consumers, particularly low-income consumers and those without banking accounts, who pay billions per year in hidden interchange fees that are passed on to them in higher prices for gas and groceries," Mr. Durbin said in a recent speech.

Retailers are vigorously lobbying lawmakers to oppose the rule's postponement, claiming that every month of delay costs merchants and consumers $1 billion. 

The big banks have kept a low profile throughout the intense lobbying drive, letting the community banks and credit unions take the lead role.

The big banks, however, are already turning to customers to make up revenue that will be lost from the new debit-card rule. In many cases, banks are adding fees and removing perks like debit-card rewards. 

Some banks are also considering capping the amount a consumer can spend on a single debit-card transaction to $50 or $100.

"We are going to have to figure out a way and we want to do it as consumer-friendly and fair," said  James Dimon, chief executive of  J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. earlier this year. "But, of course, the consumer has got to pay and they weren't paying for debit before," 

Meanwhile, small institutions have gone into high gear. 

Banks and credit unions say they will have to lower their fees to match the cap imposed on their larger competitors. That, they contend, will force them to eliminate free checking accounts or add fees such as monthly charges for debit-card use.

Small-bank and credit-union executives have bombarded lawmakers with phone calls, emails and in-person meetings to argue against implementing the debit-fee rule.

Around 4,000 credit-union employees descended on lawmakers' Washington offices a few weeks ago while in town for meetings of their trade group, the Credit Union National Association. 

The debit-fee rule was among their top issues, and now that the two bills have been introduced, they are urging support for them from their representatives, said CUNA spokesman  Pat Keefe.

Last week, the American Bankers Association had 900 members in town for its annual spring meeting, and the swipe-fee rule was topic No. 1 in their meetings with lawmakers, said  Ken Clayton, who heads the ABA's Card Policy Council.

The Independent Community Bankers of America, a trade group, said its members sent 5,000 messages to Congress in the first six hours of the business day following the introduction of the delay bills, urging support.

 Write to  Robin Sidel at robin.sidel@wsj.com 