TOKYO—Toyota Motor Corp. shook up its management team on Wednesday in a move to sharpen the Japanese auto maker's focus on hybrid vehicles and emerging markets, while forgoing the kind of aggressive growth targets that the company pursued in recent years. 

The changes formed the core of a growth strategy announced by company President  Akio Toyoda, who outlined modest earnings goals while pledging to keep his namesake company competitive with rival auto makers at home and abroad. 

"We want to build a business that can remain profitable even if there's another Lehman-type shock," Mr. Toyoda said at a news conference, referring to the financial crisis triggered by the collapse of U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers in 2008. 

The plan, called the Toyota Global Vision, is the clearest expression yet of Mr. Toyoda's attempt to chart a new course for the world's largest auto maker as it recovers from massive recalls and slower profit growth after the global economic downturn. The plan will be executed by a smaller management team led by 11 board members, or fewer than half the current 27 members. 

Toyota also eliminated 17 senior executives' positions to reduce its total number of executives to 60. Among those to lose their board seats and operational titles is Mr. Toyoda's predecessor as president, the current Vice Chairman  Katsuaki Watanabe. At the same time, Toyota promoted some officials to higher posts, including Toyota Canada chairman  Real "Ray" Tanguay, who will become one of 14 senior managing officers. Neither Mr. Watanabe nor Mr. Tanguay could be reached for comment. 

While short on specific earnings targets, the strategy spells out a future for the company in which it doubles down on strengths such as hybrid technology and in developing markets such as China and India. The company said it would roll out 10 more of its hybrid vehicles by 2015 as well as new pure electric cars, plug-in hybrids and fuel-cell vehicles. 

"Our two main pillars of growth going forward will be emerging markets and hybrid technology," Mr. Toyoda said. He added that "we can't sit on our laurels in order to stay ahead in hybrids." 

Under the plan, Toyota will aim to expand its business in emerging markets to account for 50% of total sales by 2015, up from the current 40%. It expects sales in industrialized markets such as Europe, Japan and the U.S. to fall to 50% from the current 60%. 

Mr. Toyoda said Toyota won't seek to build new factories or expand production capacity in the U.S., even as the company considers stepping up output levels in line with growth in emerging markets. That marks a shift from Toyota's buildup in its North American manufacturing base in the 2000s, including a new factory in Mississippi. Mr. Toyoda indicated that plant would be the company's last new factory in the U.S., at least through 2015. 

At the news briefing in Tokyo, Mr. Toyoda addressed hundreds of reporters solo without introducing any members of his new senior management team, or any of the departing executives. That marked a stark contrast to the announcement of his selection as president in early 2009, when he was flanked by current and outgoing managers. 

The company sought to portray the personnel changes not as a move to consolidate Mr. Toyoda's support base in the company—as some internal critics have contended—but rather as a way to clarify reporting lines and speed up decision-making. 

Mr. Toyoda also said the company was "not ready" for non-Japanese executives on its board. Instead, he said the auto maker will re-establish a long-dormant committee of outside advisers. Toyota's new regional advisory board is made up of seven academics, retired business leaders and former government officials, including former U.S. Labor Secretary  Alexis Herman and former General Motors Corp. group Vice President  Mark Hogan.They will consult with local Toyota officials who run operations in the countries where these advisers are based, Toyota said. 

Mr. Toyoda said he didn't want the company's vision to be dominated by "numerical targets" from top management. Instead, he emphasized a bottom-up vision centered on improvements in vehicle quality and fuel-efficient technology. That low-key sensibility was reflected in the company's profit and sales objectives. 

Toyota said it would boost its operating-profit margin to 5% "as soon as possible," up from the 2.9% profit margin the company expects for the current fiscal year through March. Yet that is half the level that was achieved in 2004 and targeted for in the company's previous vision plan announced in 2007. The auto maker also wants to hit one trillion yen, or $12 billion, in operating profit by the middle of the decade, which is twice current levels but also far short of the company's peak of 2.2 trillion yen in the fiscal year ended in March 2008. 

Similarly, Mr. Toyoda said he expects sales of nine million vehicles for the company's core Lexus and Toyota brands by 2015—and 10 million vehicles for the entire group, including minicar maker  Daihatsu Motor Co. and truck maker  Hino Motors Ltd. That would come six years after the company tried—and failed—to reach that milestone by 2009, when sales totaled 7.8 million vehicles. For the current year, Toyota has forecast sales of 7.5 million vehicles. 

While the latest plan's goals appear conservative compared with those of the company's previous management, Toyota said they represent "sustainable growth" and position Toyota to maintain profitability even if sales were to drop 20% because of another global recession. Toyota remains scarred by its dismal performance in the fiscal year ended in March 2009, when the company posted its first net loss in 59 years.

Toyota's financial problems helped vault Mr. Toyoda into his leadership position. He was named president in 2009, becoming the first member of the founding family to take the helm in 14 years. The new vision is Mr. Toyoda's attempt to put his stamp on the company after having spent much of the past two years dealing with the recall of as many as 10 million vehicles world-wide to repair a broad assortment of glitches. 

As if to stress his own style, Mr. Toyoda had two of Toyota's newest models parked inside the hotel ballroom in which the briefing was held. One was the $375,000 Lexus LFA sports car that made its debut in October 2009 and the other was the $10,000 Etios compact unveiled in December for the Indian market. Both cars received final approval from Mr. Toyoda after he became president.

 Write to  Yoshio Takahashi at yoshio.takahashi@dowjones.com 