HONG KONG—China Everbright Bank Co., which raised US$3.3 billion in a Shanghai initial public offering last year, has hired China Everbright Securities (HK) Ltd., China International Capital Corp., J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. and Morgan Stanley to handle its planned IPO in Hong Kong, people familiar with the situation said Monday. 

Medium-size Everbright Bank intends to conduct the offering in the third quarter, one of the people said.

The bank said in February it will sell up to 10.5 billion shares in the Hong Kong deal, with an option to allot an additional 1.5 billion shares to investors if demand is sufficient.

The lender's Shanghai-listed shares were suspended from trading Monday and ended at 3.86 yuan Friday. If it prices its Hong Kong shares at that level, it would raise US$7 billion from the offering, based on a Dow Jones Newswires calculation.

Everbright Bank said in February it will use the proceeds of the offering to boost its core-capital base. As of Sept. 30, the lender's core capital, which comprises common equity and retained profit, amounted to 8.99% of its risk-bearing assets, above the regulatory minimum 7% for local banks with a national presence.

Everbright Bank is the latest mid-size Chinese lender to repeatedly tap the capital markets to boost its capital as the government works to cool the economy. In January, China Minsheng Banking Corp., which raised US$4 billion in a Hong Kong IPO in 2009, said it intends to raise as much as 21.5 billion yuan (US$3.3 billion) from the sale of new Shanghai-listed shares.

Twelve of China's 16 listed banks raised funds last year. The five largest raised US$62 billion from stock markets in Shanghai and Hong Kong.

Activity in Hong Kong's IPO market has begun picking up after a slow start to the year; nine companies have raised a total of just US$315 million so far. Among those looking to raise funds now are Chinese property developer Top Spring International Holdings Ltd., which is meeting with investors ahead of an IPO it hopes will raise US$260 million IPO. It plans to list on March 23. Aluminum producer China Hongqiao Group Ltd. began sales to retail investors for an IPO that aims to raise up to US$1.1 billion on Monday. It plans to list March 24.

Financial firm Far East Horizon Ltd. will start marketing meetings Wednesday for a US$600 million offering, and plans to list on March 30, a person familiar with the situation said Monday.

The company, in which U.S. private-equity group Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. has a stake, plans to launch its retail offering Friday and will price the deal on March 24, the person added.

CICC, HSBC Holdings PLC, Morgan Stanley and UBS AG are handling the Far East Horizon offering, the person said.

However, several IPOs in Hong Kong have been struggling due to the uncertainty regarding instability in the Middle East and growing inflation in Asia. The earthquake in Japan is sure to add to those concerns.

Perth-based lithium-concentrate miner Galaxy Resources Ltd. said Monday it is postponing its plan to raise US$260 million ahead of a listing in Hong Kong due to unfavorable market conditions. The deal was in the pre-marketing stage last week, when a company and its bankers gauge interest in a deal.

On Friday, Resourcehouse Ltd. put on hold a revived US$3 billion IPO because of market weakness.

—Yvonne Lee  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Prudence Ho at prudence.ho@dowjones.com 