He is not a star. At least not yet in the opinion of National Hockey League officials, who withheld the designation in completing the rosters for the All-Star Game at the end of the month. John Tavares may have been an overall No. 1 draft choice. He may be the brightest light in one of the sport's darker enclosures. But it will be at least another year before he skates on hockey's grand stage.

Mr. Tavares remains weighted down by a combination of great expectations and franchise failures. Three decades after creating one of the more remarkable dynasties in NHL history, the Islanders are struggling to attract crowds to the aging Nassau Coliseum, struggling to win a third of their games and struggling to survive in the crowded New York market. A horrendous seven-week skid in which they lost all but one of 21 contests virtually knocked them out of playoff contention well before Christmas and relegated Tavares to an afterthought in the buildup to the showcase event in Raleigh.

"It would have been an honor," Mr. Tavares said when he was not among the 42 players chosen for the game. "But I'm 20 years old." 

So much of the Islanders' hope has been placed on his shoulders that it's easy to forget Mr. Tavares was a teenager when he reported to training camp this past fall. 

"There's no doubt in my mind he'll be [selected] in the future," said Pat Brisson, the agent for Tavares and three of the previous four No. 1 draft choices—Patrick Kane, Erik Johnson and Sidney Crosby, "maybe as soon as next year."

Of the last nine No. 1 picks, only Mr. Tavares and Mr. Johnson, a defenseman for the St. Louis Blues since 2006, were not invited to All-Star weekend. The list of seven who were invited includes left wing Taylor Hall of Edmonton, the top choice in 2010, who will compete against other rookies in the skills competition. 

So far this season, Mr. Tavares has notched two hat tricks, leads his team in goals (18) and points (33) and is on pace to easily exceed his rookie totals of 24 goals and 54 points. "He's a better player than he was last year," Islanders captain Doug Weight said recently. "He's stronger on the puck. Watching him the last 12 games, I saw a kid who's going to be a 75-100 point scorer and a star in this league for a long time."

Three of Mr. Tavares' four game-winning goals have come in overtime, including two during a 7-2 stretch that stabilized the club. As many of the team's veterans—among them Mr. Weight—suffered serious injuries, the young center from Ontario assumed a bigger leadership role on a team whose average age, on any given night, is in the neighborhood of 25.

"I'm still learning," Mr. Tavares said. "But I've always been a guy who accepts responsibility on and off the ice. I don't talk a lot, but I try to set an example."

Although he may never score with the flair of an Alex Ovechkin or the frequency of a Steven Stamkos, two other previous No. 1 picks, his team improved 17 points in the standings during his rookie season, exceeding the gain of any other No. 1 choice in the decade.

But his second season with the Islanders has been sabotaged by significant injuries in camp, inconsistent goaltending and the dismissal of coach Scott Gordon during the course of a disastrous stretch that lasted from October 23 to December 13.

"Going through that brought us closer as a team," said Mr. Tavares. "We're handling adversity much better. If we get off to a bad start, we don't let that get us down.''

Indeed, in the next-to-last game of a 3-2 road trip against Western Conference teams, the Islanders fell behind Colorado, 2-0, and rallied for a 4-3 overtime victory on a goal by Mr. Tavares. On the first game of the ensuing homestand, they overcame a 2-0 deficit against a Vancouver team that led the NHL in points and victories, only to lose a 4-3 decision in overtime.

But to reach that point even the level-headed Mr. Tavares, who broke one of Wayne Gretzky's scoring records as a junior, needed some counseling. He said his leaned on Mr. Brisson and Mr. Weight, the 39-year-old journeyman with whose family he spent his rookie season.

"I was on the East Coast," said the agent, who represents Creative Artists Agency in Los Angeles, "and I said, 'John, I'm coming in. Let's meet for lunch.' We have a great relationship. Your parents are always there for you, but sometimes you need a different voice. John is very hard on himself. He was disappointed. He was searching for a way and he was very receptive [to suggestions].

"It's happened to all our players, without exceptions. It's happened to Jonathan Toews, to Patrick Kane. No one comes into the NHL and succeeds without a few bumps along the way."

Mr. Weight, who went on injured reserve in mid-November at the outset of the skid, said he reached out to his young teammate three times during the next seven weeks. He told Mr. Tavares that although great teams invariably are unselfish, there were times when a player had to worry about himself and set personal goals in order to rise above the circumstances.

"There can be negativity in the workplace," the veteran explained. "I wanted him to take himself out of it, to get a little selfish, to try to be a star on every shift. I got that advice when I went to Edmonton in 1993. I don't care if you score in a 10-1 game. You go after that second goal and that third goal."

As Mr. Tavares regained his confidence, accounting for 13 points in nine games that included consecutive victories over the Pittsburgh Penguins and Detroit Red Wings, the Islanders began reversing course. "It's difficult losing," he reflected. "You're frustrated. You have to see the light at the end of the tunnel. I still love the game. I've had a lot of success [in hockey]. You've got to remind yourself that success will come back."

The absence of instant gratification that has become the norm for so many top draft picks emboldened Canadian reporters to ask if he had regrets about his time with the Islanders, a franchise that hasn't won a playoff series since 1993 and has been losing millions of dollars a year in a cramped facility.

"None whatsoever," he said. "You learn different things at different times throughout your career and I'm learning how to be a professional. I feel I'm progressing not only from year to year but from month to month and day to day. It's been a great experience. "

Unlike some of his predecessors at the top of the amateur draft, Mr. Tavares has been learning the hard way.

Mr. Weight would like to see his protégé relax more, something he was able to do last season while playing with the mentor's three children. "He hasn't developed a lot of interests outside the game," the veteran said. "But he's very responsible. He's prepared for this his whole life. He wants to be great. He's got the talent and the work ethic."

Add to that a dose of grit. Responding to rumors that his client might want to leave the Islanders for a better situation at the conclusion of his three-year, entry-level contract, Mr. Brisson said, "We've never approached the subject. John wants to make it work. His honest goal is to bring a championship team to Long Island."