Consumer prices are rising at a quick pace in the some of the largest economies in Latin America, complicating the task of governments that want to maintain high growth rates without sparking inflation.

 On Friday, Brazil announced that consumer prices in 2010 had increased faster than the government's targeted levels, mainly driven by higher food costs. The news is likely to weigh on the new administration of President  Dilma Rousseff, who has vowed to maintain policies that have led to the country's economic boom of the past decade in which millions of Brazilians improved their living standards.

But as she took office Jan 1, Ms Rousseff declared high inflation was a "plague" that damaged poor families, and vowed to fight it. Brazil and other Latin American economies have been able to grow with relatively low inflation rates, but higher food and energy costs around the world bring a new challenge to policy makers. 

Higher interest rates, the basic tool central banks use to fight inflation, will have a direct impact on the emerging consumer classes that have enjoyed access to financing and driven higher domestic demand.

Brazil's Central Bank meets on Jan. 18 and 19. While there is no consensus on the outcome of the meeting, December's inflation reading supports those calling for higher rates.

The latest data puts the 2010 figure slightly above the 5.90% average forecast of 100 analysts and economists in the Brazilian Central Bank's weekly survey Jan 3, and notably higher than the 4.31% pace of consumer price inflation in 2009. The rate was the highest since 2004, when inflation hit 7.6%. 

Brazil's government stuck zealously to 4.5% inflation target for 2010, despite soaring food costs in recent months which have raised inflationary pressures. The Central Bank's new head,  Alexandre Tombini, said Thursday the government plans to continue to pursue an annual 4.5% target for 2011, while analysts already expect 5.32%. 

In Mexico, the region's second largest economy, consumer prices data also leased Friday showed a higher than expected rise in December, pushing inflation for the full year to 4.4%, up from 2009 when the economy suffered a deep recession. 

The Bank of Mexico said that the consumer price index rose 0.50% last month, as higher prices of cigarettes, tortillas, and limes outweighed declines in others items. 

Still, the Bank of Mexico said that after spiking higher in the first quarter of 2010, inflation eased on favorable produce prices and a smaller-than expected impact from last year's increase in consumer taxes. 

The Bank of Mexico expects annual inflation will continue to move lower in the first quarter of this year, and by the third quarter approach its 3% plus-or-minus one percentage point target range. 

With inflation seen remaining tame, market expectations are that the Bank of Mexico will leave its overnight rate target unchanged in 2011 at the current 4.5%, and begin raising interest rates in 2012. 

Peru, another fast growing economy, is also taking measures to fight inflation. The country's Central Bank on Thursday decided to take a preventive step, increasing its reference interest rate citing dynamic domestic demand, "in a scenario of increases in the international prices for food and energy." 

—  Robert Kozak in Lima contributed to this article



 Write to  Anthony Harrup at anthony.harrup@dowjones.com 