Syria escalated a country-wide crackdown on protesters Wednesday as tanks shelled a central city and a southern town, killing at least 30 people, rights activists said.

At least 19 people were killed in shelling on Homs—mostly on the Bab Amro area, about six miles, or 10 kilometers, from the city center—with dozens injured, activists said. Tanks also shelled Al Hara, a town near Deraa in the south of Syria, killing at least 11 and injuring hundreds, said  Wissam Tarif, executive director of Insan, a Syria-focused human-rights group based in Spain.

With the multiple shellings, President Bashar al-Assad's government appears to have further embraced the violent strategy that other regimes, including Iran and Libya, have employed to clamp down on pro-democracy movements. That puts the Assad regime—primarily Alawite, one of several large minorities in Sunni-majority Syria—at risk of further isolation from the international community. 

"They have perceived this as an existential fight for the survival of their sect," said a retired Arab diplomat. 

U.S. lawmakers drafted a resolution calling for President Barack Obama to impose sanctions directly on Mr. Assad. The Senate resolution, with backers from both parties, said the Assad regime had lost its legitimacy "through its campaign of violence and gross human-rights abuses."

Senior U.S. officials said they were alarmed by the violence but that Mr. Obama wasn't yet prepared to call on Mr. Assad to step down. The White House announced sanctions on senior Syrian government members this month, and the White House said more officials, including Mr. Assad, could be targeted.

European Union member states summoned Syrian ambassadors Wednesday to warn them that sanctions would soon be stepped up if Damascus doesn't halt the repression of protestors. The EU has imposed sanctions on 13 Syrian officials. A second round targeting the country's top leadership, including Mr. Assad, could be imposed as early as this week, an EU official said.

With Wednesday's attacks, Damascus is expanding a formula it launched in the city of Deraa, where Syria's antiregime demonstrations first erupted nearly eight weeks ago, activists say. Syria's military held the southern city under siege for at least 11 days, leaving residents cut off from electricity and water for about a week. 

Though the government announced it was lifting the blockade last week, city residents say tanks remained in the city and activists say tanks have shelled surrounding villages constantly this week. Deraa residents haven't been reachable by phone since Friday. The United Nations said a mission that was promised entry to the city still hasn't gained access.

"It's a pattern, and they just expanded it after they found relative success in Deraa," Mr. Tarif said. 

"The operation has two stages. One is siege, to keep people inside and [set up] security check points. Then an army unit arrives, the raids start in coordination with military and security intelligence. They raid homes, break doors, gather families in a room and select from anyone between the ages of 15 and 60 in some cases, and in others they have a list of names to detain," he said.

Syria's government, which has characterized the uprising as a foreign-backed terrorist initiative, said Wednesday the army continued to pursue armed terrorist groups and said it killed or injured a number of them.

Protests have since spread to other cities, in part as Syrians oppose the brutal methods of the crackdown itself. Syria's military has since moved beyond Deraa against other restive areas, including Banias on the western coast and Homs in the center. 

Homs, Syria's third-largest city, last Friday saw some of the largest protests and most violent clashes with security forces, in which at least 15 people were killed.

Residents reported tanks bombing Bab Amro, outside Homs, in on-and-off attacks between midnight and 7 a.m. local time, according to several rights groups that said they were relaying witness reports. It was unclear whether shelling continued later Wednesday.

The last report by residents of shelling was at 7:14 a.m., according to Mr. Tarif. By the afternoon, he said Homs had been cut off from communications and his group was unable to verify reports of more deaths. 

"Nothing is coming through. We just have no access," he said. Repeated attempts to reach people in Homs by cellular and satellite phone lines were unsuccessful.

  Rami Abdel Rahman, head of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, said Homs residents woke up to "waves of sounds of explosions." 

One activist account online said residents saw tanks positioned at a train station shelling in the direction of Bab Amro.

Small-business owners in the city, a major industrial center about 100 miles, or 160 kilometers, north of Damascus, announced a strike for Thursday to mourn people killed across Syria and in solidarity with areas across Homs they describe as under siege, according to a copy of a statement circulated by activists. The statement is signed in the name of the city's merchants. It couldn't be independently verified. 

The statement named 11 areas and suburbs across Homs as being under siege. It denounced "barbaric attacks by security forces and 'shabeeha' including the indiscriminate bombing of neighborhoods, firing of live ammunition on citizens and breaking into homes." Shabeeha is a term used to describe gunmen loyal to the government. 

More than 500 people have been arrested in home raids across Homs over the last 36 hours, Mr. Tarif said. Rampant door-to-door raids across the country have created an internal "runaway crisis" with thousands of Syrians displaced and on the run, he added. 

Despite the rising death toll from weeks of unrest, people across Syria continue to protest the government of President Bashar al-Assad. See events by day.

Track events day by day in the region.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

Insan estimates 8,000 people are missing or detained in Syria since the unrest began in mid-March, while rights groups estimate at least 600 people have died since then. These numbers have been difficult for outside groups to verify, with communication cut and direct reporting by foreign journalists on the conflict prohibited by the goverment.

In Banias, electricity and telecommunications were back on Wednesday, after an almost 40-hour blackout, Mr. Tarif said.

In Syria's two largest cities, Damascus and Aleppo, protests have remained small and contained. A protest activist in Aleppo said security forces foiled a student demonstration there on Tuesday evening for the second day in a row.

"They stopped us quickly," the activist said by telephone. "I don't know what's going on, maybe there are informers among us," he said. 

A small group of students started marching on Aleppo University's campus, carrying Coke bottles the activist said they planned to use to wash tear gas from their faces, and plastic bags wrapped around their shoes to protect against taser shocks. The activist said other students started turning on them.

"I couldn't believe it when some of the students started attacking us," he said. "I said, 'You are also a student, a son of Syria, why are you doing this?' " 

Protests also emerged Tuesday in the southern towns of Jassim and Tafas, despite a continued crackdown by tanks and troops there, and in Latakia, activists said.

Latakia, on the Mediterranean coast above Banias, may be an area where the army turns to quell protests next, activists said. Tanks have surrounded the city's main square for six weeks.

Syria's government said Wednesday it had formed a committee, made up of a number of officials and law academics, to prepare a new draft law for general elections "compatible with the best internationally recognized standards."

Syria's parliament, the People's Assembly, held the last meeting of its four-year term earlier this month. Elections are due but it is unclear when they will be held. Of the 250-member body, a coalition of parties led by the Ba'ath party must hold two-thirds of the seats. 

—Jay Solomonand Stephen Fidlercontributed to this article.

 Write to  Nour Malas at nour.malas@dowjones.com 