A retail and culinary explosion inspired by new restaurants, chic boutiques and general stores with an old-time aesthetic has taken hold of Franklin Street in Greenpoint, Brooklyn.

A string of independent clothing stores have sprung up within steps of each other on a stretch of Franklin Street between Green and Oak streets in the past couple of years—some with attached studio workspace where many of the wares are designed and created.

"For many designer-entrepreneurs, having more space has been the main draw in Greenpoint," said designer  Shana Tabor, who owns In God We Trust, a clothing boutique with workspace just off Franklin Street that she opened in 2010.

Other clothing newcomers to open their doors on Franklin Street since 2009 include People of the Free Mind, Julia James, Petit Boudoir, Pip-Squeak Chapeau Etc. and Old Hollywood.

Many along the indie fashion retail strip say they've had a warm reception in Greenpoint, traditionally a Polish stronghold with an industrial past.

"I hit the right audience at the right time—a time when people don't want to look like everybody else." said John-Michael Schlotter, designer-owner of newly opened boutique People of the Free Mind.

  Maryam Zadeh, a real-estate broker with Prudential Douglas Elliman who manages commercial loft space at 61 Greenpoint Ave., the site of an old pencil factory, says the stretch has become a haven for artists who are getting priced out elsewhere.

"Artists are having to move farther and farther out into the boroughs for affordable space" said Ms. Zadeh. "There's a huge community of creative types ranging from fashion designers, recording artists, illustrators and graphic artists who have moved into the neighborhood."

The area has seen a surge in new residents in recent years. But compared with neighboring Williamsburg, the pace of development has been slower. A two-train commute to Manhattan is a factor, according to locals. The area is served by the G train, which doesn't directly connect to Manhattan—forcing commuters to transfer in Williamsburg or in Long Island City, Queens.

Still, many young families have been drawn to the area in recent years. "We see a lot more young families with strollers on the sidewalks," said  Jackie Satta, a Greenpoint native who owns Garden Spot Café.

And slightly longer commute is no match for the still-affordable digs that Greenpoint has to offer. "I don't need to go to Manhattan much," said  Julia Young, owner of Julia James clothing boutique. "I just wanted to get in while Franklin was still expanding and affordable."

In addition to the budding fashion row, half a dozen restaurants offering diverse culinary treats have popped up on Franklin Street. They include pizza joint Paulie Gee's, Cookie Road Café, French café and crêperie Le Gamin, Vamos Al Tequila and Anella.

The neighborhood is also home to a recently opened private skateboard park—House of Vans—as well as Pentatonic, an musical instrument shop on Franklin Street.

Other parts of Greenpoint are also undergoing growth spurts.

"What's happening on Franklin Street is representative of what's happening throughout Greenpoint," said  Ed Veneziano, acting chairman of the Greenpoint Business Alliance.

Among relative newcomers to the food and fashion scene in other parts of Greenpoint, Mr. Veneziano points to Heath Ledger's restaurant Five Leaves on Bedford Avenue and Loren, a denim store opened by former  Ralph Lauren and Levi Strauss designer  Loren Cronk.

But while Greenpoint continues to see new residents and entrepreneurs coming its way, many locals as well as business owners are concerned about the possibility of a homeless shelter opening its doors in the area.

At a recent community board hearing, more than 100 residents spoke against a proposal by Help USA, a nonprofit whose board is headed by  Maria Cuomo Cole, the governor's sister, to operate a shelter for homeless men at 400 McGuinness Blvd.

"This neighborhood has been growing tremendously and has a developing waterfront with a lot of investment behind it," said  Christopher Olechowski, chairman of Community Board 1. "I don't think those involved with the proposal realize how much it will affect property values as well as the quality of life of residents."

The status of the proposal, filed a proposal with the city's Department of Homeless Services, remains unclear. "The agency is proceeding through the procurement process and cannot comment further pending negotiation," said  Heather Janik, a spokeswoman for the Department of Homeless Services.

Lawrence Cann. a spokesman for Help USA, said: "It's not prudent for us to comment on this at the moment because it's being reviewed" 

While some in the community are anxious about the outcome of the proposed shelter, newcomers continue to chalk out plans for new establishments.

Fashion designers  Sarah James and  Billy Vogel, who moved into a loft space on Franklin Street last year after losing their lease on a Williamsburg studio, were hunting for commercial space on a recent Friday afternoon.

"If all goes well, we'll be the newest kids on the block in a couple of months," said Mr. Vogel.