ISLAMABAD--A Pakistan high court backed off from deciding whether a Central Intelligence Agency contractor held for killing two armed men is covered by diplomatic immunity, saying that a separate court hearing a murder case against the contractor would rule on the issue. 

The decision means the CIA contractor,  Raymond Davis, whose detention has severely strained U.S.-Pakistan relations, is unlikely to get out of jail any time soon despite high-level U.S. entreaties. 

The U.S. claims Mr. Davis shot two armed robbers in self-defense Jan. 27 in the eastern city of Lahore. Senior officials, including President Barack Obama, have said Mr. Davis is covered by diplomatic immunity and should be immediately released from jail.

But massive protests and threats of violence from Islamist groups that want to see Mr. Davis prosecuted in Pakistan has made it hard for the government of President  Asif Ali Zardari to intervene in the case.

The U.S. was hoping the high court would rule Monday that Mr. Davis had immunity, ending a separate criminal case against Mr. Davis on murder charges.

But  Ejaz Chaudhry, the chief justice of the Lahore High Court ruled the judges hearing the murder case should decide on immunity.

The decision came after Pakistan's Foreign Ministry informed the high court that it had no clear record regarding Mr. Davis's immunity. The ministry said in a statement presented to court that if it found any such record in the future it would inform the judges.

The murder case, which is taking place inside the high-security Kot Lakhpat jail in Lahore where Mr. Davis is being held, will resume Wednesday. He has not yet been formally charged.

The U.S. Embassy in Islamabad says Mr. Davis arrived in Pakistan in October 2009. The Embassy says it informed the Foreign Ministry of his arrival in January 2010, which the U.S. says means he's covered by immunity from prosecution under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

U.S. officials have acknowledged Mr. Davis, a former U.S. Special Forces soldier, was working as a security contractor for the CIA but they haven't detailed the exact role he played.

The Davis affair has pushed relations between the U.S. and Pakistan to new lows. The U.S. has canceled international meetings involving Pakistan to show its displeasure.

Some members of Congress are now questioning the billions of dollars in U.S. civilian and military aid that goes to Pakistan each year.

In Pakistan, anti-American sentiment had been fanned by unmanned CIA drone strikes against Taliban targets in the tribal regions. The strikes, which critics say also kill civilians, are unpopular in Pakistan.

At least three people were killed by a missile fired by a drone in North Waziristan on Sunday evening, Pakistani officials said.

The attack hit a target in Miranshah, the capital of North Waziristan, which U.S. and Pakistani intelligence officials say has become the main hub of al Qaeda and Taliban insurgents. 