As a quiet winter raises concerns that the Yankees don't have enough starting pitching to win a World Series, the team's most influential offseason acquisition could be a lumpy 56-year-old with seven career pitching appearances to his name.

Larry Rothschild, New York's new pitching coach, arrives with a clear pitching philosophy to teach and a troubled but talented star pupil who seems to be crying out for his kind of help. In A.J. Burnett, Mr. Rothschild has a reclamation project that could define the coach's first year on the job—and the Yankee pitching staff as a whole.

With spring training looming, Mr. Rothschild has made Mr. Burnett his top priority. The coach flew to Mr. Burnett's Maryland home earlier this month to talk pitching, acting as part psychologist, part horse trainer to rebuild Mr. Burnett's confidence and mechanics after a difficult 2010 season. 

"What came first, the chicken or the egg?" Mr. Rothschild said. "Was it the struggles that caused the loss of confidence, or was it something that caused the loss of confidence, and then that caused problems mechanically? It's not one or the other, it's which one came first. It helps to solve the mystery if you can do that." 

The new pitching coach wouldn't divulge how exactly he plans to coax Mr. Burnett back to excellence. If history is any guide, he'll use the strikeout to do it. 

Mr. Rothschild is the guru of the strikeout. His Chicago clubs were strikeout monsters, and fans at Wrigley had plenty of reason to break out the ''K'' placards.

Over Mr. Rothschild's nine seasons in Chicago, his Cubs led the majors with 11,604 strikeouts—the only team in the majors to average more than eight Ks per nine innings. In 2003, his Cubs set a major league record with 1,404 strikeouts. His players don't pitch with the strikeout as the goal, but they are told to attack the strike zone and challenge hitters, and strikeouts are the natural result.

Mr. Rothschild enjoyed a brief, eight-inning major league career with Detroit in the early 1980s (notching only one strikeout), but he has since made his mark as an aggressive pitching coach with the Florida Marlins and the Cubs, one who tries to balance the benefits of the strikeout against the dangers of the walk. 

"Pitching ahead puts you in a position to strike guys out. But there's a tradeoff: You don't want to strike guys out at the risk of walking them," Mr. Rothschild said. 

While he did have some big arms to work with in Chicago, Mr. Rothschild gained a reputation for improving most pitchers' strikeout rates significantly while cutting their walk rates slightly.

One of Mr. Rothschild's protégés was former Cub Rich Hill, who evolved into an aggressive, strikeout-per-inning hurler in his time with Chicago. Now with the Boston Red Sox, Mr. Hill still hears Mr. Rothschild's voice in his head, reminding him to ''fill the zone with strikes.'' 

"Larry was always big on attacking the hitter, pitching aggressively," Mr. Hill said.

 Mr. Hill and Mr. Rothschild still talk from time to time, and while Hill doesn't know the tactics the coach is using with Mr. Burnett, Mr. Hill remembers the steps Mr. Rothschild would take to fix his own issues. It was a remedy stressing simplicity, videotape, and ''never blinking.'' 

"He would always say, 'Don't blink. Just go out there and stay aggressive,'" Mr. Hill said. 

"I think it just comes back to simplicity," Mr. Hill continued. "Trying not to make anything bigger than it is.''

In Mr. Burnett and the Yankee staff, Mr. Rothschild has some serious clay to mold. 

The Yankees' biggest names have strikeout stuff but have seen their numbers fall in recent years. Mr. Burnett struck out 231 batters in 221 innings in 2008. CC Sabathia did even better that year, striking out 251— nearly a batter per inning.

Last season, however, Mr. Burnett struck out only 145 batters, in 186 innings, and threw fewer pitches in the strike zone than ever before. Mr. Sabathia struck out 197 hitters in 237 innings. 

Meanwhile, Yankee walks have climbed. The Yankees were one of the best teams in the league at avoiding walks over the past 10 years, but in the past two seasons, New York has been merely average. Some of that is directly linked to the oft-wild Mr. Burnett. After signing a five-year, $82.5 million deal to join New York following the 2008 season, Mr. Burnett led the league in walks with 97 in 2009, and gave out 78 free passes in 2010. 

Mr. Burnett's 2010 season fell apart when then-pitching coach Dave Eiland took a one-month leave of absence in June. Mr. Eiland was fired after the season, and Mr. Rothschild was lured away from the Cubs a few weeks later. 

When Mr. Rothschild flew to Mr. Burnett's home earlier this month, the pair talked pitching, did some work on flat-ground throwing and discussed how the pitcher can get back to basics. 

"I don't think there's huge changes to make," Mr. Rothschild said. "I think there's some things he can do to simplify things. Get his delivery straightened out to get in line to the plate better. It's not like it's something that he hasn't done before." 

They developed a good rapport, Mr. Rothschild said, talking about "where he is at this point in his career, and where he wants to get to, and how he feels about things. And his responses were very good. And that's a great place to start." 

Yankee manager Joe Girardi was the Cubs' backup catcher in 2002, Mr. Rothschild's first season with Chicago. Mr. Girardi said he heard good things about Mr. Rothschild's meeting with Mr. Burnett, and he is optimistic about his pitcher's prospects this season.

"I really believe that A.J.'s going to have a bounce-back year," Mr. Girardi said. "Now, I can't tell you exactly why, but I really believe, in my heart, that he's going to have a bounce-back year."

All these chats and positive vibes are a good start, but they're the kind that accompany most winters. Despite the dominance of Mr. Sabathia, the Yankees ranked a middling seventh in the American League in team ERA in 2010.

When Mr. Rothschild joined Chicago in 2002 after he was fired as the inaugural manager of the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, the pitching coach provided no immediate bump. His staff performed poorly, one of many problems on a last-place team. 

But then in four of the next eight seasons, his staffs posted ERAs among the top three in the National League.

The Yankees are crossing their fingers that the new coach can bring that kind of instant improvement to New York, and turn Mr. Burnett into another of Mr. Rothschild's true believers. 