A Vietnam War veteran and former aide to three U.S. presidents who was found slain in a Wilmington, Del., garbage dump was last seen alive in the city's business district a day before his body was discovered, authorities said Tuesday. 

John Wheeler, of New Castle, was seen at about 3:30 p.m. last Thursday, a spokesman for the Newark Police Department said. 

The police received a tip reporting the sighting and were able to confirm that Mr. Wheeler, 66, was in the area of 10th and Orange Streets, Lt. Mark Farrall said. Lt. Farrall declined to reveal how the tip was verified. 

Still, how Mr. Wheeler's body ended up in a garbage truck and dumped into the Cherry Island Landfill Friday remains a mystery. Authorities said the medical examiner ruled his death a homicide but haven't released how he died. 

Lt. Farrall said a crime scene is yet to be established. What is known is that Mr. Wheeler's body was likely picked up from a dumpster along a 10-stop route in Newark, Del.

His car was located at a municipal garage near the Amtrak station in Wilmington and isn't considered to be part of the criminal probe, Lt. Farrall said. 

Mr. Wheeler lived about 12 miles away and worked as a defense consultant for Mitre Corp. of Bedford, Mass. and McLean, Va. 

He often traveled between New York, Delaware and Washington, D.C. He is credited with being a driving force behind the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and worked on job placement for veterans during the Ronald Reagan administration. 

He also worked on George H.W. Bush's transition team and served as an assistant to the Secretary of the Air Force under George W. Bush. 

On Tuesday, his wife Katherine Klyce, 66, released a statement through the Newark police. 

"As you must appreciate, this is a tragic time for the family," the statement said. "We are grieving our loss." 

The FBI has been consulted in the case, Lt. Farrall said, declining to elaborate on their involvement. He said an ongoing court dispute over the use of land by a neighbor in New Castle was a "facet" of the investigation. 

 Write to  Tamer El-Ghobashy at tamer.el-ghobashy@wsj.com and Sean Gardiner at sean.gardiner@wsj.com 