HONG KONG—Hong Kong fixed-line operator  PCCW Ltd.
PCCWY


0.70
%




 said Tuesday that a possible listing of its telecommunications assets in the form of a business trust is one way to unlock value for shareholders. 

PCCW Group Managing Director  Alex Arena told reporters that the company remains in talks with Hong Kong regulators on the proposal, which he described to be at "a very preliminary stage." 

However, the executive remained tight-lipped about details of the plan including the timetable, venue, valuation and appointment of bank advisers for the proposed listing. 

On Monday, PCCW, controlled by  Richard Li, the younger son of Hong Kong tycoon  Li Ka-shing, said it was in preliminary stages of "exploring the feasibility of a spin-off and separate listing" of its telecoms business as a business trust. 

The move could see the younger Mr. Li, who controls a stake of about 27% in the company, cash out on a debt-laden investment, which is now worth a fraction of its value when he bought the assets in 2000. PCCW's core telecoms business operates in a low-growth market amid intense competition with other operators. Over the past few years, the stock has consistently been trading at about 95% below its peak of HK$99.46 in March 2000.

When asked whether PCCW's major shareholders, including state-owned China United Network Communications Group Co., have approved the listing proposal, Mr. Arena said PCCW has a very proper decision-making process and that both of its major shareholders are represented on the board. Officials at China United Network didn't immediately respond to a request for comment. 

"Everybody is included in that process…nothing happens unless we bring all the constituencies to…the issue," said Mr. Arena. 

China United Network has a stake of about 18.5% in PCCW. 

Mr. Arena's comments come after PCCW reported its 2010 net profit rose 28% to 1.93 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$247.5 million) from HK$1.51 billion because of revaluation gains on its property and financial investments as well as stringent cost controls. 

Stripping out one-time gains, the company's core earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, a key measure of profitability for telecom operators, rose 5% to HK$7.07 billion from HK$6.72 billion a year earlier, reflecting limited growth opportunities in Hong Kong's saturated telecom market. 

Consolidated revenue for the Hong Kong-listed company fell 8% to HK$22.96 billion from HK$25.08 billion. 

Richard Li acquired Hong Kong's dominant phone company in 2000 in a deal valued at US$28 billion, which was Asia's biggest acquisition at the time. The phone company held a decades-long monopoly in Hong Kong's long-distance telephone market until the late 1990s. 

 The company's shares fell 1.2% Tuesday in Hong Kong.