 A Design Legend's Other Talent 

The French designer Charlotte Perriand (1903-99) had a passion for "l'oeil en éventail" or the wide-angled view. Apart from her bold and utilitarian design work—which involved partnerships with such 20th-century stars as Le Corbusier, Pierre Jeanneret and Jean Prouvé—this Modernist had a love of the lens. 

The exhibit "Charlotte Perriand, from Photography to Design," opening April 7 at Le Petit Palais in Paris, celebrates it all. The show will present 70 examples of Perriand's "Equipment for Living" furniture, including the iconic B306 tubular chaise, displayed alongside 380 black-and-white prints from the designer's archives. In contrast to her machine-made furniture, Perriand's "Art Brut" photographic style portrays a more personal, organic universe of landscapes, rocks and fish vertebrae. On view through Sept. 18, petitpalais.paris.fr  

 Hermès Gets the Blues 

Delft potters and Chinese vase painters recognized the beauty of pairing blue and white long ago. This spring, creators of home accessories are catching the wave. 

For the Bleus d'Ailleurs collection of porcelain tableware for Hermès, the designers took their blue-and-white cues from Chinese Ming and Yuan porcelain along with Azulejo tiles from Spain. 

A mix of hexagons and geo-floral motifs come together in a 22-piece, machine-washable set of bowls, plates, platters, coffee and tea cups and saucers; a soup tureen, vase and Uzbeki-inspired teapot complete the range. (Available mid-May.) From $140 for a large bowl, hermes.com        

 Patio (or Living Room) Perfect 

François Azambourg has a knack for state-of-the-art innovation. In 2005, the Paris-based industrial designer patented a super lightweight briefcase for Hermès that used a sandwich of leather and foam. 

Unusual mechanics also played a part in his 2006 Mr. Bugatti series of stools and chairs, in which injected polyurethane reinforces crinkly tin. 

Mr. Azambourg's latest venture, Grillage, is an origami-style chair made from a single sheet of creased metal mesh. Available in light blue or black, the outdoor chair can be outfitted with an upholstered cushion for indoor use. 39¼ x 29 x 11¾ inches, $1,005, ligne-roset-usa.com  